Goal 17: Strengthen the means of implementation and revitalize the Global Partnership for Sustainable Development
Goal 17 seeks to strengthen global partnerships to support and achieve the ambitious targets of the 2030 Agenda, bringing together national governments, the international community, civil society, the private sector and other actors. Despite advances in certain areas, more needs to be done to accelerate progress. All stakeholders will have to refocus and intensify their efforts on areas where progress has been slow.
fIn 2017, net ODA totalled $146.6 billion in 2017, a decrease of 0.6 per cent from 2016 in real terms. ODA as a share of donors’ gross national income (GNI) remained low, at 0.31 per cent.
fIn 2016, remittances to low- and lower-middle-income countries were more than three times the amount of ODA they received.
fIn LDCs, debt service as a proportion of exports of goods and services increased for five consecutive years—from a low of 3.5 per cent in 2011 to 8.6 per cent in 2016.
fIn 2016, high-speed fixed-broadband reached 6 per cent of the population in developing countries, compared to 24 per cent in developed countries.
fTotal ODA for capacity-building and national planning amounted to $20.4 billion in 2016, representing 18 per cent of total aid allocable by sector, a proportion that has been stable since 2010.
fThe developing regions’ share of world merchandise exports declined for two consecutive years: from 45.4 per cent in 2014 to 44.2 per cent in 2016, a sharp contrast to an average annual 1.2 percentage point increase between 2001 and 2012. For LDCs, the share of world merchandise exports decreased from 1.1 per cent to 0.9 per cent between 2013 and 2016, compared to the rise from 0.6 per cent to 1.1 per cent between 2000 and 2013.
fIn 2017, 102 countries or areas were implementing national statistical plans. Sub-Saharan Africa remained in the lead, with 31 countries implementing such plans; however, only three of them were fully funded.
fIn 2015, developing countries received $541 million in financial support from multilateral and bilateral donors for all areas of statistics. This amount represented only 0.3 per cent of total ODA, short of what is needed to ensure that countries in developing regions are better equipped to implement and monitor their development agendas.
fDuring the decade from 2008 to 2017, 89 per cent of countries or areas conducted at least one population and housing census.
ODA for capacity- building and national planning was
$20.4 billion in 2016, which has been stable since 2010
LDCs’ share of world merchandise exports fell between 2013 and 2016, after a long period of increase
1.5
0.75
0.6
1.1
0.9
0
2000 2013 2016
In 2015, developing countries received only 0.3 per cent of total ODA
to support all areas of statistics
0.3%
/Users/mlafleur/Library/CloudStorage/OneDrive-UnitedNations/quanta/helper/GPT-wess/1948-2014/SOCIAL_SURVEY_1995-clean.txt
/Users/mlafleur/Library/CloudStorage/OneDrive-UnitedNations/quanta/helper/GPT-wess/1948-2014/1996wess_clean.txt
/Users/mlafleur/Library/CloudStorage/OneDrive-UnitedNations/quanta/helper/GPT-wess/1948-2014/1997wess_clean.txt

PART TWO: A Perspective on Policies

Overcoming economic recession and countering high rates of inflation have been major goals for short-term policy-making in the developed market economies since the end of the Second World War. Rates of success in the policy arena may have been mixed, but the tools of policy were seen as quite potent. Today, the view is more nuanced. Macroeconomic policy is still widely considered necessary, and a potent means, to avoid reaching the extreme points of business cycles. However, the capacity to fine-tune in the short run through macroeconomic management per se is thought to be small.

Rather, govermnent maintenance of "credibility" in the eyes of domestic and international economic actors has emerged as an explicit characteristic of macroeconomic management. Achieving a stable and predictable macroeconomic enviromnent seems to have become the one permanent policy goal. Thus, while policy makers will act against recession and inflation shocks and intervene to maintain the exchange rate within a stated band in some cases these are seen as temporary departures from the long-run goal of achieving and maintaining price stability using strict monetary control and sustainable budget policies.

WHAT FISCAL POLICY CAN AND CANNOT DO

Fiscal policy the use of changes in total government expenditure and taxation to influence aggregate demand and output has been very much on the defensive in recent years. Few would deny, however, that government has a crucial role in promoting economic growth over the long run through an appropriate set of expenditures and taxes. The direct and indirect influences of government are still seen as especially significant in terms of capital formation both physical and human not to mention the giving of a special impulse to the advance of science and technology, as through the support of basic research and the training of researchers.

Rather, what is doubted is the ability of fiscal policy to bring an economy close to its "production possibilities frontier" and hold it there indefinitely without starting off an inflationary cycle. Most see the more pragmatic assignment for fiscal policy to be, instead, a reducing of the amplitude of cyclical fluctuations around the growth path of potential output; but even here, discretionary actions are given a very limited role.' That is to say, rather than discretionary actions, the primary set of fiscal tools that serve to dampen the business cycle are thought to be the "automatic stabilizers", which are features of government budgets that automatically tend to counter deepening slack or excessive expenditure in the private sector. Examples include unemployment insurance, income supplements and related entitlements that grow, automatically and temporarily, during slack economic periods. A progressive income tax serves a comparable function, as it takes a smaller bite out of falling incomes than out of rising ones, making disposable personal income less sensii ive than gross personal income to fluctuations in aggregate demand.

When allowed to perform symmetrically against the peaks and troughs of conomic cycles in the developed market economies, automatic stabilizers are potent. Simulations by the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), for example, suggest that automatic stabilizers on average reduce cyclical fluctuations in output by almost 40 per cent.2 Difficulties can develop, however, when Governments temper the effect of the demand-reducing side of the stabilizers through discretionary policies, as they have been doing since the early 1970s.3

In other words, the ability of Governments to implement activist fiscal policies successfully on a consistent basis is no longer thought to be obvious. Fiscal expansion can help stimulate recovery of an economy in recession by offsetting a temporary deficiency in demand; but the fiscal impulse must arrive in a timely way, be given in appropriate doses and be reversed as soon as clear signs of an upswing begin to appear. The problem is that the lag between the point when the need for the fiscal stimulus is recognized and that when expenditures are disbursed or taxes reduced can be quite long. Indeed, the point of recognition may occur well after the need first arose.

Owing to delays in recognition, decision and implementation, as well as inevitable errors in forecasting economic activity, fiscal stimuli have often come too late, lasted too long and thereby contributed to the overheating of economies during the boom phase of the business cycle;4 and without automatic "sunset clauses" in the legislation enabling the fiscal impulse, new legislation is required to raise taxes or cut back expenditures. Certainly, the politics of forming anti-recessionary coalitions in parliaments are much simpler than those of forming demand-reducing ones: the difference is one of deciding between "whose ox to gore" and how many new oxen to distribute.

The above considerations do not mean that a discretionary fiscal response to an economic shock is always ruled out. However, the need for a discretionary stimulus has to be clear. This might be the case, for example, when a large degree of cyclical slack is exacerbated by adverse structural developments. A recent example of such a situation was in Japan. From March 1992 through February 1994, amid a sharp slow-down in economic growth, huge excess capacity owing to previous overinvestment and mounting concerns over the health of the banking system after the collapse of the financial "bubble", the Japanese Government introduced five successive fiscal packages which together committed about Y30 trillion.s The fiscal stimulus supported the economy through the most critical phases of the recession. Moreover, there were no further initiatives after February 1994, near the end of the trough of the recession, although the Government decided to postpone ending a temporary tax break for two yearsA

More generally, the decision about whether to apply a discretionary fiscal stimulus, such as a tax cut, is complicated by the fact that undifferentiated additional spending wherein, say, additional consumption is viewed as being equally effective as additional investment is not always the appropriate response to a slackening of aggregate economic activity; It depends on the reasons for the downturn. Thus, it has been increasingly argued that fiscal policy is the appropriate policy response only to temporary demand shocks, whereas the "permanent" shocks require changes in economic structures and factor price adjustment.? For instance, a significant increase in government expenditures in most OECD countries after the first oil shock in 1973 could not prevent unemployment from rising while inflation accelerated.

In practice, it is difficult to make a distinction between temporary and permanent shocks and the probability of errors in identifying the source of the underlying shock is high. In particular, a demand decline owing to changes in trend or potential growth rates could be mistakenly identified as an aggregate demand shortfall, setting in motion offsetting fiscal policies. It seems that in the 1970s and the early 1980s this is what happened in many countries, with the slow-down in the growth of productivity. As a result, necessary adjustments were delayed, while persistent fiscal impulses that aimed to avoid output losses produced very modest output gains, and the increments to government debt mounted.

Fiscal policy is nevertheless still believed to have a definite role in demand management, in general through automatic stabilizers and on occasion through discretionary actions; but policy makers do seem increasingly reluctant to apply fiscal stimuli for counter-cyclic purposes.

Indeed, with financial market analysts looking over their shoulder, policy makers have voiced increasingly loud concern to the effect that Governments can neither "afford" fiscal stimulus nor even allow an unrestricted working of automatic stabilizers during slack periods. In actual fact, during the 1975 recession, a fiscal stimulus preceded the recovery in all major OECD countries. However, during the early 1980s and even more so in the early 1990s, automatic stabilizers in a large number of countries were offset, at least partly, by discretionary policy tightening Furthermore, during the next cyclic downturn, many Governments might see themselves as being forced to suppress automatic stabilizers unless fiscal consolidation measures taken in the recovery phase are deemed to have been successful.

This loss of fiscal flexibility is largely associated with the rapid rise in government debt in the 1980s and 1990s. For the developed market economies as a whole, the ratio of gross public debt to gross domestic product (GDP) was estimated by OECD as about 70 per cent in 1994, against 41 per cent in 1980;9 but is 70 per cent of GDP a "dangerous" level for public debt? Or 100 per cent? And how would we know?

How much public debt is too much?

There is no standard rule of thumb for a sustainable level of public debt, or even for what to include in the measure of deboo Government debt is usually defined as the gross financial liabilities of the central, state, provincial and local Governments, plus certain official agencies, generally including the pension funds and social security operations. It typically does not include, however, unfunded government pension obligations.

Certainly, some amounts of government debt are desirable, even necessary. As a generally risk-free asset, government bonds have traditionally provided a major vehicle for saving by households. Not only does this operate at the personal level, but government-run pension and social security schemes generally place surplus revenues in government bonds as they build up their resources for use in later years. Shorter-run government debt instruments are also desirable vehicles for risk-free, short-term placements of excess funds. In addition, as the most widely utilized and highly liquid financial asset, government securities are the preferred instruments for the "open market operations" of central banks, wherein those banks add money to the economy by buying bonds or siphon money out of the economy by selling bonds.

Not only are government securities important financial assets for every market economy, but Governments should and do finance long-run public investment by borrowing. For example, there is no reason taxpayers in a community should pay in one year for the full cost of a sewerage system that will benefit them and their descendants for fifty years. Also, Governments should and do borrow on a short-term basis to pay for current expenditures in anticipation of tax revenues that are paid mainly in quarterly instalments.

Thus, some levels of government debt are absolutely necessary and for most of the post-war era, policy makers in most industrialized countries were not especially concerned about the total size of the public debt. Indeed, in three of the seven major industrialized economies, the ratio of public debt to GDP fell for a significant part of the post-war period. In Canada and the United States of America, the debt ratio fell during the 1960s and 1970s and in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland it fell through the 1980s (see figure IV.!). Much of the early debt in all three countries had been built up during the Second World War.

Nevertheless, by the mid-1990s, for almost every developed market economy (Ireland being one exception), the debt ratio had been growing for several years; but had those debt ratios become too high? The European Union adopted a maximum debt-to-GDP ratio of 60 per cent as one of its guidelines in determining when member countries would qualify to move to the last stage of the transition to the Economic and Monetary Union; but that ratio seems to have had no rationale except that it was near the average in the European Union at the time the Maastricht Treaty on European Union was agreed.0 In addition, during the recent recession, Japan was pushed by its fellow members of the Group of Seven to pursue an expansionary fiscal policy while there were widespread concerns over the United States fiscal deficit. At that time, the Japanese public debt ratio was on the order of 70 per cent, while the United States ratio was about 60 per cent.

However, the government can also hold financial assets and thus net debt ratios are also calculated, as shown in the figure, to indicate the net financial exposure of the government sector. If the government as a whole has a large gross debt, but also large financial holdings, then if borrowing costs rise when interest rates rise, so, too, do interest earnings on the government's loans and other assets. Indeed, the comparison made above of the United States and Japan in terms of gross debt ratios becomes quite different if the comparison is made in terms of net debt ratios. The difference primarily results from the very large net asset position of Japan's social security system, owing in particular to the relatively small but rapidly growing share of elderly people in Japan.


If in some countries, such as Japan and the United States, the difference between net and gross government debt has been growing, in others, such as France and Germany. the difference has been narrowing. In still other countries, notably Italy. the Government holds relatively few financial assets.

Such concerns notwithstanding, as long as the government's debt is mostly denominated in domestic currency, the traditional thinking has been that there is little need to think about -bankruptcy". If a government liquidity crisis were to arise, the monetary authority would be able to extend emergency loans and the government or at least the central government would almost always have the taxing and budgetary authority to avoid insolvency. However, for state, provincial or local levels of government, not to mention specialized official agencies, all of which have restricted abilities to tax, bankruptcy has sometimes been the result of poor public management and unforeseen financial shocks. The debt of the central government in industrialized countries, however, is traditionally the "risk-free" asset par excellence.

Except, of course, that there is a "real" risk of loss when inflation accelerates and the real value of the government's debt-servicing payments falls, penalizing holders of government bonds (unless the debt is indexed or pays a variable interest rate). This is precisely what nervous bondholders would seek to avoid and indeed it is not uncommon for government to be the propagator of the rise in inflation, usually when it finances the deficit through money creation, that is, by obtaining central bank credit to cover its fiscal deficit. The bank pays for the bonds with money that is not in circulation and then faces two choices. If it withdraws an equal amount of money from elsewhere in the economy, it squeezes the private sector to finance the government deficit. If it allows the total money supply to rise, the monetary value of expenditures rises and so may inflation.

Monetizing the deficit and imposing an inflation tax have long been a way through which Governments avoid making difficult tax and expenditure decisions, and this scheme that goes back to the early sovereigns who debased their currencies by clipping metal from their coins to mint additional ones. The time-tested solution has been to separate the government from its monetary authority. In any event, this all has to do with how the government finances its deficit, not with the stock of debt per se.

Budgetary policy under minimal guidelines on debt

If it is thus difficult to determine how high a debt level must be to be excessive. it is nevertheless clear that a permanently rising debt-to-GDP ratio will ultimately reach an unsustainable level. A cautious approach would thus be to not risk the attainment of an unsustainable level by acting to prevent any unnecessary rise in this ratio. Hence, a sustainable set of budget policies is now widely interpreted to be one through which the government debt-to-GDP ratio is stable or leclining. This does not always require budgetary balance, only a small enough deficit to ensure that the stock of outstanding debt grows at least no faster than nominal GDP. Also, there may be temporary jumps in the ratio owing to cyclic variations in output. The requirement, in other words, is to stabilize or reduce the debt-to-GDP ratio over the business cycle. Since the early 1980s, however, only Ireland, Norway and the United Kingdom have passed this -sustainability test".


Analysis of fiscal policy within the context of the government debt problem is facilitated by decomposing changes in the debt-to-GDP ratio into certain components that can be combined in the following equation:

The first component of changes in the debt-to-GDP ratio in the equation is the primary deficit and, indeed, the discretionary expenditures and taxes that have to be adjusted to prevent the debt ratio from rising are those embodied in the p term. In practice, government revenues and expenditures can be adjusted only within certain politically and economically determined margins. These margins may differ from country to country, but they certainly exist. Therefore. one limit on the debt-to-GDP ratio, in terms of how large it should be allowed to grow, is the point beyond which the adjustment in p needed for its stabilization would become incompatible with the margins for manoeuvre on revenues and expenditures, that is, the point where stabilization would require more severe budgetary policies than could be envisaged.

A second component of the growth of the debt-to-GDP ratio is the relationship between the average interest rate on government debt and the growth of nominal GDP. The larger is i-g, the faster the debt will grow relative to the economy's overall ability to support it (assuming an unchanged p). By the same token, if the growth rate of nominal GDP exceeds the interest rate, the debt-toGDP ratio falls. When inflation is high, nominal GDP may indeed grow at a rate that exceeds the interest rate.

These relationships are useful for understanding what happened in several industrialized countries in the 1980s. For instance, in the United Kingdom much of the reduction in the debt ratio seen in figure IV. I. was the result of rising prices. Italy and Ireland had the largest cumulated deficits among western European countries. As a result, their debt-to-GDP ratios increased, but by less than they would have in the absence of the effects of inflation. Conversely, compared to Ireland and Italy, cumulated deficits led to disproportionately large hikes in the debt-to-GDP ratios in Belgium and the Netherlands. The commitment to a strong link with the deutsche mark forced those countries to keep inflation rather low.13 In the 1990s. the option to inflate away the debt stocks has ceased to exist for most developed market economies. Certainly. financial markets react quickly if they come to fear that inflation might erode the value of government debt and, in essence, require Governments to pay higher interest rates as a result.

When debt levels are high and inflation is low, the government budget constraint becomes very tight. For instance, for a country with a debt ratio of 100 per cent and an interest rate at least as high as the growth of nominal GDP, a I percentage point increase in the interest rate on the debt adds 1 per cent of GDP to the interest burden. To keep the debt-to-GDP ratio constant, budget cuts of 1 per cent of GDP would be needed.

Indeed, not only have debt ratios risen and inflation rates fallen over the past two decades or so, but average interest rates on government debt have risen as well, owing not only to monetary policies that aimed to curtail inflation and thereby raised interest rates generally, but also to financial-sector deregulation, including important changes in the nature of government securities markets.

As for the latter, there has been a clear trend towards a stronger role of markets in government debt managementii Indeed, the number of developed countries that still require banks and other financial institutions to hold specified amounts of government securities and set liquidity ratio requirements in terms of government securities has declined sharply. Hence, privileged access by the government to domestic sources of finance has been progressively abolished. In most developed market economies this trend has been reinforced dramatically by the abolition of controls on international financial flows. The removal of both domestic and foreign exchange controls has significantly reduced Governments' ability to maintain the private sector's demand for public bonds at artificially low interest rates. At the same time, the central banks' role as an underwriter of last resort of new government issues has been reduced markedly. For instance, in Italy, central bank holdings of government debt declined from 40 per cent in 1976 to 13 per cent in 1989.a

These reforms have helped improve the attractiveness of domestic markets for government securities for institutional investors at home and abroad. Thus, institutional holdings of government debt are increasing in most countries. Besides, there has been strong growth in the volume of cross-border transactions in government paper. For instance, foreign holdings of German public debt rose from 9 per cent in 1980 to 26 per cent in 1992, while in France, non-resident ownership of government debt rose from less than 1 per cent in 1986 to almost 43 per cent in 1992.16 Foreign holdings of government debt also rose sharply in Australia, Canada, Italy, Sweden and the United Kingdom. Consequently, government securities markets have grown increasingly integrated across countries.

Indeed, the distinction between "owing the debt to ourselves" and owing it to foreign creditors is less significant than it once was, as all private-sector purchasers of government securities have so many more options than they once had. At the same time, the opening of a larger pool of resources (both domestically and internationally) for government debt financing has brought with it an increasing surveillance by global capital markets. This surveillance is being implemented in a rather straightforward manner: the more favourable the market's evaluation of current and future fiscal policies, the lower will be the country's borrowing costs and, consequently, the higher will be the government's ability to maintain a reasonable degree of fiscal manoeuvrability.

The 1994 surge in government bond yields across the industrialized countries may serve as a good illustration of this general observation. In 1994, longterm bond yields in industrialized countries rose sharply on a large revision of expectations about economic performance as well as the future path of interest rates and exchange rates. However, the size of the interest rate increase varied wally across countries. Indeed, the increases from February 1994 until the end of the year ranged from 1.2 to 4.5 percentage points.

Hence, along with a uniform change in market perceptions, there was a reassessment by investors of individual country risks. The largest increases in interest rates took place in Australia, Canada, Greece, Finland, Italy, Spain and Sweden, countries with large fiscal deficits and debts. For instance, the difference in yields (or spread) between Italian 10-year government bonds and comparable German bunds more than doubled in 1994, to about 4.5 percentage points, and by the end of 1994, Swedish 10-year bonds yielded 3.5 percentage points over bunch, twice as much as at the beginning of the year.

The global rise in interest rates has pushed up debt-service costs and has increased anxieties about the sustainability of the budget policies of these countries. The nervousness in financial markets stems from the fear that, as in the past, some countries may try to reduce the burden of their debts by inflating the problem away; so, to protect themselves against this risk, investors require higher interest rates.

If the size of the risk premium and the debt situation are thus interrelated (higher risk premium leads to larger debt-service payments), there can emerge a vicious circle: With a large amount of debt outstanding, upward movements in interest rates translate into further increases in debt-service costs and in the deficit and debt; and this widening of the deficit causes investors to once again assess the risk premiums and the interest rates they demand. The result is still higher rates. another deterioration of the deficit and debt positions, and new risk reassessment.

There is some reason to believe, however, that financial markets do not fully follow this logic. For instance, to stabilize the debt-to-GDP ratios, France and the United Kingdom would need to make larger budget adjustments in relation to GDP than Canada. Yet the risk premium embodied in Canadian bonds is higher.n More generally, the market's inflation fears may be overblown, as the budgetary problems of most countries do not seem to be so pronounced that there is no alternative but for the central banks to monetize the debt. Indeed, to a degree investors are ignoring or heavily discounting the global monetary policy shift towards price stability.

At the same time, markets seem to be rewarding countries with an established track record of non-monetization of government debt. According to several studies, real long-term interest rates in European Union core countries (except Germany) have been systematically lower than might have been expected given their relatively large debt ratios.ls In this regard. the most striking example is Belgium. Despite a debt-to-GDP ratio of more than 140 per cent, by the end of 1994 the 10-year government bond spread between Belgium and Germany was approximately 3.5 percentage points lower than that between Italy and Germany.

Monetary policy could attain price stability quite apart from fiscal policy. However, without fiscal prudence the resulting mix of policies could be very far from optimal because interest rates would be much higher than otherwise. In fact, the Italian and Swedish central banks began to raise interest rates in August 1994. Those moves did not result from typical cyclic pressures. Instead, they have been largely associated with market reaction to high government deficits and debts.

Indeed, many developed countries have announced targets for fiscal consolidation. In the medium term these targets aim to reduce, or at least stabilize, the debt-toGDP ratios. Of course, in practice, the speed at which government revenues and expenditures can be adjusted over time is limited. It may therefore take some years to move the primary balance towards a sufficient surplus for stabilization of the debt-to-GDP ratio. However, if the consolidation gains momentum, it is more likely than not that a vicious circle will be replaced by a virtuous one, when falling interest rates lead to reduced debt-service costs, smaller budget imbalances, further declines in the risk premiums and hence to smaller adjustment costs.

WHAT MONETARY POLICY CAN AND CANNOT DO

If discretionary fiscal policy is currently seen to have a rather limited role in promoting economic growth even in recessionary times, as argued above, there is still the option of monetary policy. except that Governments also seem to view monetary policy as under major limitations.

Indeed, in recent years a consensus has emerged that a monetary policy aimed at price stability would be the general orientation that could contribute most significantly to achieving maximal, sustainable employment and economic growth. Emphasis on price stability rests importantly on general acceptance of the evidence that there is no mediumor long-term trade-off between inflation and unemployment to be exploited. Thus, although monetary easing effectively ends recessions, it will, if it persists too long, also put an economy on an unsustainably rapid growth path.

A common theoretical understanding of the underlying mechanism is that an expansion of money incomes raises spending and thus real output even when spending rises so much that the rate of inflation goes up as well. People are said not to notice the inflation at first; hence it is sometimes called "surprise" inflation. However, such a surprise cannot last long as, over time. the public realizes that the real value of money and other assets is falling. People feel less well off and thus they cut back their expenditure, eventually returning the economy to the status quo ante in "real" terms. In other words, over the longer run, an excessively stimulative monetary policy will result in higher inflation, with the economy still returning to the initial long-run growth path.

Moreover, the ability of monetary policy to produce even short-term inflation surprises has been reduced as the sensitivity to signs of future inflation trends has been spreading widely in the industrialized economies. Securities markets, in particular, are extremely sensitive to inflation risks; and owing to the growing importance of securities financing, those markets are gaining more power to effectively neutralize, via higher interest rates, any policy-easing that is considered to lw inflationary." The markets can be wrong about inflation, however, and push up market interest rates when the underlying real economy is quite weak. Policy makers are then caught in the dilemma of further loosening monetary policy while trying to convince the market that its inflation fears are overblown.

Traditionally, the major financial intermediaries have been fractionalreserve banks and thrifts, whose assets and liabilities are, except in bankruptcy, redeemable at par. The assets and liabilities are not directly traded on secondary markets and hence are not "marked to market". In other words, the prices" of loans and deposits on the banks' books are always at par, notwithstanding interest rate changes. When central banks loosen the monetary reins by supplying more reserves to the banks, the banks seek to expand their loans. In a bank-dominated financial sector this would increase the availability and lower the cost of loanable funds.

When financial markets are important sources of funds, however, the story can be different. If the market interprets the monetary easing as inflationary, the prices of bonds and notes fall and the yield on credit from the market does not, or not as much as the cost of bank credit, lithe market's share of total finance were small, this would not matter; but traditional parvalue banking is gradually being eclipsed by the so-called share or "mutual fund" banking which deals only in securitized assets. Such market intermediation has grown especially rapidly in the United States, but the United States is only the most extreme example of a general trend in developed countries.a Indeed, since the early 1980s, even in Germany and Japan, there has been a steady decline in the proportion of corporate and household financial assets held in the form of bank deposits. For example, in Germany bank deposits as a proportion of corporate financial assets declined from 58 per cent in 1980 to 44 per cent in 1990 and, in Japan. from 79 to 47 per cent. In the United States, this proportion held relatively steady during the 1980s at about 20 per cent after a steep fall in the 1970s. The share of bank loans in corporate liabilities has also declined in these countries.n

Of course, it would be an exaggeration to state that central banks are powerless. At the same time, it is apparent that over the past two decades die centrality of the central banks has been eroded in many countries, as mediumto long-term interest rates the most important rates for private spending decisions have become less responsive to changes in short-term bankdominated interest rates. Indeed, several studies have demonstrated that in the 1980s and early 1990s, in comparison with the 1960s and the 1970s, there was a smaller response of the long-bond rate as well as of real output to the shortterm rate in Canada, France, Sweden, Switzerland, the United kingdom and the United States countries that had liberalized their financial systems to a relatively greater extent. n Conversely, the response was broadly similar in the second period in Germany and Japan, where financial liberalization had proceeded much more slowly.

At the same time, in most developed countries the influence of foreign financial players and markets in determining domestic interest rates has been growing. This poses an additional constraint on monetary policy, especially in countries that seek to fix their exchange rates and are forced thereby to use monetary policy to maintain the exchange rate.

On the other hand, it is also worth noting that financial liberalization and internationalization, by providing more alternative sources of funds, might have begun to act as an "automatic stabilizer" and contributed to some smoothing of the business cycle, as expenditures are becoming less directly constrained by transitory changes in local credit availability. Thus, not only has the leverage of monetary policy been declining, but also the need to finetune monetary conditions may have been reduced.

Given the spreading perception of greater limitations of monetary policy in short-term, macroeconomic management, it is not surprising that achieving and then maintaining price stability are seen today as a major or even a predominant policy goal by central banks. Indeed, important modifications in legislation in many countries have also been part and parcel of the changing view that has given more authority and independence to central banks and directed them to focus mainly on the objective of price stability.


Making nionetary policy with a longer horizon

The narrowing of objectives pursued by central banks has not, however, relieved monetary authorities from coping with the increasing difficulty of monetary management. Because the link between central bank actions and overall financial conditions is much weaker than it once was, the relationship between central bank actions and inflation is more uncertain and subject to long and variable lags. Hence, to maintain price stability, central banks now seek to alter policy long before inflation changes become clearly visible in economic statistics. Accordingly, policy makers look for early-warning indicators that can shed at least some light on when, how much and how fast short-term interest rates should be adjusted to prevent future inflation from taking off, or on when to relax policy to shorten a downturn in activity.

The search for inflation-precursor indicators is a relatively recent phenomenon. Over the past three decades, attention focused instead on changes in various measures of the money stock and monetary base, supplemented by various credit indicators. The strategy then for reaching price stability was to set appropriate growth targets for those money-supply measures and implement them through more-or-less-routine open-market operations. This tactic has now largely been abandoned.

That approach to monetary policy was based on the notion that past relationships in the economy would continue to hold in the future and that some money supply "rule" for policy makers to follow would lead to greater price stability than the discretionary manipulation of short-term interest rates. Although the effectiveness of this approach was always disputed and never followed blindly, by the 1980s changing financial markets had disrupted the historical relationships between familiar financial aggregates on the one hand, and income and prices on the other. In addition, a new stable relationship was not expected to re-emerge any time soon. n All in all, it became much more widely accepted that no monetary rule, however complex and sophisticated, would be adequate to steer the economy, as it would always be insufficiently responsive to changing economic structures. Monetary policy was inevitably a matter of judgement.

Faced with these deficiencies in monetary targeting, central banks have compromised. If they continue to set monetary targets at all,25 they define these targets in terms of rather wide ranges. Moreover, on occasion they allow these ranges to be violated when the targets are likely to be achieved only at the expense of inferior economic outcomes. For example, in Germany, of the 20 targets set between 1975 and 1994, only 10 were achieved; and there have never been attempts to compensate for deviation in one year by making corresponding changes in a target for the next year.n

Thus, the central banks have been forced to pay less attention to intermediate indicators and more to anticipating movements in inflation itself. Accordingly, formal and informal medium-term inflation targets have now been set in many developed economies. Finland, France, Italy and New Zealand aim at a rate of 2 per cent or less, while target inflation bands are 1-4 per cent in the United Kingdom and 1-3 per cent in Canada and Sweden. In Germany, together with its monetary target, the Bundesbank has for many years also announced a target inflation rate of 2 per cent per year. In Europe, Maastricht Treaty convergence criteria for prospective members of the Economic and Monetary Union include inflation not exceeding by more than 1.5 percentage points the average rate of the three best-performing member countries. The United States has not established any implicit or explicit targets thus far. Nevertheless, the United States Federal Reserve believes in "the maintenance of inflation sufficiently low that it need not be a factor in business and consumer decisionmaking",28 which could be taken as an informal target. In its conduct of monetary policy, the United States as well as Japan now relies on a broad range of indicators, with less weight being given to monetary aggregates.a

There is thus a greater premium being placed today on correctly assessing what the future state of an economy would be under alternative assumptions about policy-controlled interest rates. In this regard, monetary policy has been increasingly tied to the perception of the likely performance of the real economy, with a much broader range of both financial aggregates and non-financial variables being taken into account. In other words, the focus is more on expenditure and production and less on monetarist models.

The risk of future upward inflation movements is seen to come, at least in part, from the pressure of output on productive capacity. Thus, in theory, policy makers should seek to expand demand until the output gap the difference between actual and potential output is closed and then keep demand growing at the same rate as potential production. In this view, monetary policy should aim at promoting as much growth of output and employment as can be achieved without imposing destabilizing inflationary pressures on productive resources.

In practice, there are many uncertainties governing how to translate that goal into operational measures of GDP and employment. It is well understood that aggregate measures of economic potential are quite uncertain and could be used only as rough starting-points in monetary policy-making. Moreover. over the past decade, the uncertainties about these measures have increased as the units of capacity have become more difficult to identify, owing to an increase in the share of output that reflects ideas and services rather than physical substances. Central banks cannot rely heavily on any one estimate of either the "natural rate of unemployment" or "potential" GDP growth. As for measuring the actual state of the economy, traditional aggregate data on unemployment, sales, national income, prices or money supply are themselves available after the fact and do not warn early enough about, say, the development or easing of bottlenecks.

Thus, increasing attention has been paid in recent years to monitoring individual financial, product and labour markets themselves. This has been done to search for evidence of tightness that might indicate whether inflationary pressures (or excess slack) are building. Consequently, various surveys and reports, many containing anecdotal information, are gaining greater attention, including those on firm behaviour, supply-demand conditions in particular sectors, lead-times on deliveries of new orders, materials and commodity prices, iiivestment intentions, shortages of skilled labour and so on.

Financial flows are also considered useful sources of information on future price developments. Thus, the Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board proposed that real interest rates might be an indicator.a The implied level of real interest rates inferred from current nominal interest rates and estimates of inflation expectations could be compared with what might be considered normal as a cycle average, with due allowance for cyclic and structural changes. The "yield curve" usually showing rising rates of interest on government securities of increasing maturity is another indicator receiving increased attention. An abnormally steep yield curve might indicate that market participants anticipated that short-term rates would have to rise to avoid inflationary imbalances; and conversely, an unusually flat slope might signal the need for monetary easing to reduce slack and avoid recession. As a final example, central banks have also begun collecting and processing information from derivatives markets to gauge market sentiment as to future price developments.

Economists do not expect to find that any individual indicator or any composite index that combines many indicators will give reliable advance warning of inflation. Thus, it is quite difficult, if not impossible, to reach a definitive judgement ex ante on whether a prospective change in policy is ahead of price changes or has missed a turning-point in inflation. Consequently, when formal or informal inflation targets are adopted, monetary authorities may be induced to lean consistently, whenever there is an area of uncertainty, on the side of tighter policy. The risk is that in their tireless pursuit of price stability, the central bankers may miss the signs of disinflation and provoke a sustained contraction of demand.

Indeed, the current expansionary phase of the cycle has been the first to witness pre-emptive strikes against inflation in the sense that monetary policy has begun tightening without clear evidence of rising inflation. There is also much discussion, especially in the financial community, about whether these actions have been too weak and too slow or too strong and too early. This new approach is being tried in Australia, Canada (although other factors have also pushed towards tightening there), Japan, New Zealand, the United Kingdom and the United States; and in Germany, the Bundesbank stopped easing monetary conditions in 1994, when monetary growth was still relatively weak and inflation falling.

It remains to be seen whether this time monetary authorities will be able to combine a strong and long-lasting recovery with price stability. Meanwhile, the level of long-term interest rates suggests that the markets are expecting inflation to rise, that is to say, they do not believe that national monetary authorities will act quickly enough to stem inflation because there will be political pressures to deliver higher output growth. Hence, despite the recent shifts in monetary policy, the overall credibility of central banks is still not everywhere beyond dispute. In attempts to maintain and enhance their credibility, however, central banks should not overreact, as not every shift in market sentiment has a sound rationale.

This is important domestically and globally, since changing monetary conditions in major industrialized countries have international effects, particularly on developing countries, as they impact both on international costs of borrowing and on key currency exchange rates. As is described in the next chapter, international monetary conditions are only some of the myriad factors impinging on policy makers in the more financially open economies that must be managed in a flexible and quick-footed manner in a world that no longer leaves much room for policy error.


The shift in economic policy that took place during the 1980s has continued into the 1990s and has reached virtually all developing countries. As is well known, the general trend of policy reform has been towards liberalization of regulations and reduction of the direct role of the state in economic production, towards broadening the spheres in which market mechanisms are relied upon instead of administrative controls, and towards encouraging more integration into the international economy both to promote competitiveness and to tap more successfully into world markets of goods, finance and technology. Instances are as varied as the opening of trade in foodgrains and agricultural inputs to the private sector in Bangladesh, the privatization of pension schemes in Chile, and the permission recently given by the Government to establish foreign banks in the Philippines.

The balance-of-payments constraints that afflicted so many developing countries in the wake of the debt crisis of the early 1980s were, to a large extent, at the origin of the reform process. That is, policy reform became ineluctable in the 1980s in numerous countries with stabilization and adjustment problems. Over the years, however, "adjustment" came to cover such a wide range of issues and policies that, in the present stage, the analysis of the success or lack of success of stabilization and adjustment programmes has in fact become a discussion about the determinants of growth and development.'

There is virtual unanimity about the need for sustainable macroeconomic balance as a condition for economic growth. This does not mean, however, that consensus exists about the path to follow in each case in order to reach that goal and even less about ways of improving longterm economic prospects. The so-called Ww.hington consensus always more of a consensus among policy advisers than policy makers no longer holds, even among advisers, as soon as policy recommen-(bilious have to go beyond such generalities as macroeconomic prudence and liberalization.2 In the typical instance, policy debate though not necessarily public debate takes place regarding the magnitude and the speed of adjustment, the sequence of reforms, and cost-sharing within the society and between the reforming country and its partners, not to mention the choice and effectiveness of policy instruments. In all, macroeconomic policy-making in developing countries as elsewhere is a difficult art.


It is now widely recognized that policy cannot be made from a single instruction booklet.3 Both the appropriate choice of instruments and the sequencing of policies depend upon initial conditions and each step taken conditions what is to be the next appropriate step. One can speak, in other words, of a "path-dependence" for policy options!

For instance, it would be difficult to reduce the budget deficit and liberalize trade at the same time in a country where import taxes contribute a large share of government revenues. Thus, for some African countries, the price of trade liberalization was at least a temporary worsening of the budget deficit. For Costa Rica, which faced such a question at a certain stage of its adjustment programme, this meant fiscal reform before trade liberalization. In addition, for countries coming out of periods of severe civil strife, trade taxes can be the easiest to administer. Thus, in the period of peace-building operations, there might be no other option than relying on customs duties for government revenues.

Certain measures that could contribute to poverty alleviation can also be caught in such a sequencing dilemma. During the implementation of the first stages of the latest Brazilian stabilization programme, for instance, the team in charge of formulation and implementation of the policy declared that a rise in the minimum wage had to wait for the overhauling of the social security system, whose financial conditions were such that it could go bankrupt in case of a large increase of the minimum wage, to which pensions were linked. Also in China, India and the Philippines, as analysed below, a trade-off between stabilization and reduction in unemployment was present.

In general, concerns with poverty alleviation cannot be dealt with in isolation and have to be part and parcel of the reform package. Governments and even financial markets might be asking how large a current account deficit is unsustainable; but political risk analysts are asking whether the degree of inequity in sharing the social cost of adjustment might also be unsustainable. In short, there are social and political dimensions of path dependence that those developing a strategy for economic stabilization need to take into account.

THE ABILITY TO MAKE TIMELY CORRECTIONS

Successful adjustment depends, inter alia, on government commitment to an appropriate set of policies for a period of time sufficient to create confidence in the rules concerning investment and production. Thus, political sustainability is an essential ingredient of policy reform. Persistence in an overall direction and adoption of a long-run perspective, for example, seem to be among the ingredients of the recipe for east Asian success.

However, given the general direction, success will also depend on daily management and prompt corrections of policy in accordance with the responses they have provoked. In particular, owing to intensified integration of local economies into world markets, the international factors that might affect national performance have become more significant. The high degree of uncertainty at the international level makes macroeconomic management a complex game, where inappropriate policy changes (for example, "stop-go" policy-making) can undermine an adjustment strategy, as can adhering to a policy beyond its actual usefulness. In other words, correctly timed corrections can be as important as the general direction of policy.

Another dimension to the issue of timing policy changes pertains to the inherent inconsistencies in some policies, through which the attainment of a policy goal on one front (price stabilization, for instance, through use of a fixed exchange rate as a "nominal anchor") can give rise to imbalance on another front (unsustainable current account deficit, for instance). The art of the policy maker is to recognize when the danger from the policy inconsistency begins to overwhelm the benefit from the policy itself, for example, when devaluing a pegged currency no longer constitutes confidence-building, but rather an acknowledgement of confidence already lost.'

The timing of decisions can be crucial. The liberalization of the capital account and, in particular, the opening of financial markets in developing countries to external flows seem to have reduced the margin for error. With capital free to enter and leave a country, much depends on maintaining the confidence of wealth-holders and portfolio managers, many of whom seek earnings from advantageously moving their funds in anticipation of changes in security prices and exchange rates. These changes depend in part on anticipating policy changes.

Mexico at the end of 1994 was an extreme example as regards difficulties in the timing and the preparation of its devaluation; but there are several countries that have faced and will face similarly difficult choices. The Mexican case also illustrates another aspect of policy dynamics. After the Mexican devaluation, the magnitude of what was deemed to be a sustainable current account deficit in Latin American countries in general shrank and various countries had to takc steps to reduce payments deficits.

THE BALANCE-OF-PAYMENTS CONSTRAINT AND EXCHANGE RATES

The international environment to which each country is adjusting is an inevitable factor conditioning domestic policy reform. No one disputes that the success rate of policy reform is higher and social hardship lower when the external environment is favourable. However, different elements determine if the environment is favourable for different countries. Mexico's fate in 1994 was certainly not helped by the rise of interest rates in the United States of America during that year and the subsequent slow-down of private capital flows to Mexico; but this of course did not affect economies in which the current account deficit had been financed essentially by official credit.

In the same vein, not all developing countries suffer a deterioration of terms of trade from a fall in commodity prices. While terms of trade deteriorated in African countries in recent years, they remained unchanged or improved in the successful exporters of manufactures of east Asia. Moreover, Latin American exports benefited marginally, if at all, from the appreciation of the Japanese yen that helped manufacturing exports of several Asian countries.

Sometimes a single factor can have both negative and positive effects. The marked financial inflows to some countries in the first years of the 1990s carried the advantage of greater expenditure (higher "absorption") in those countries that had become newly popular with international investors; but they also caused the appreciation of the domestic currency,' which had a negative impact on exports and import substitutes and usually resulted in the appearance or widening of a trade deficit. In other words, the shift to a positive net transfer of financial resources in the recipient countries, while reducing the balance-ofpayments constraint, created new challenges for policy makers.

Appreciation of the currency was very much a Latin American occurrence, but it could be detected in 1994 also in Asia (for example, in India and the Philippines and to a certain extent in China, as analysed below). Even in Africa, where market forces and policies had been favouring depreciation rather than appreciation of currencies, one finds various cases of appreciation in 1994 owing to higher supplies of foreign currency (arising from exports, workers' remittances, private capital inflow and official aid).

A major change in the external environment with which many developing countries are trying to cope in 1995 is reduced access to external finance, in particular flows through stock exchanges and bond markets. All in all, a slowdown in capital inflows that had begun in 1994 accelerated in early 1995, especially in Latin America. Though Latin America has had the worst retraction, the stock exchanges of almost all emerging markets suffered declines starting on 19 December 1994, when the Mexican peso crisis began. Moreover, the spreads among interest rates on bond issues have also increased.

One of the implications of this development, as may be inferred from the regional and country discussions below, is that many more countries are facing actual or potential balance-of-payments difficulties. In each case, domestic or external imbalances intensified and then certain events triggered a reassessment of the country on the part of financial investors and others who operate in foreign exchange markets.

What is particularly striking is that the policy packages that were chosen to deal with the balance-of-payments difficulties generally reflected the new outward orientation and liberalization of exchange controls on capital movements. Devaluations of exchange rates and increases in interest rates were more likely to be used than the direct capital controls that had prevailed in earlier decades.

Still, some countries, such as Brazil in early 1995. had recourse to increases in import duties to counter the deterioration in the balance of payments. This points up the danger to trade liberalization that "hot money" flows can pose. Indeed, not only the worldwide integration of markets but also the intensified regional integration of recent years can be challenged by the payments adjustment process. In the Southern Cone Common Market (MERCOSUR), in particular, there is some concern that any adverse fallout on Argentina from the Mexican crisis will rapidly spread to Argentina's main regional trade partner, Brazil; and thus the internal debate on the direction of both exchange rate policy and trade policy heightened in these countries in the aftermath of the Mexican devaluation.

The volatility of some categories of capital flows also raises questions about the wisdom of eliminating all capital controls at this stage of development. Certainly, liberalization of capital controls by the developed market economies came at a later stage of their economic development (and in Europe only very recently); however, the extent of world financial integration may have made the gainsaying of the policy choices almost moot. In any event, the benefits of complete liberalization are now being weighed against the difficulty in coping with the resulting instability. Thus, although a large number of developing countries liberalized their capital account, several of them kept or reintroduced regulations to restrain or slow the more volatile types of flow. Chile is one example of a country that reintroduced some controls in it, capital account with beneficial effect.

FROM ADJUSTMENT TO GROWTH

The issue of what can be considered a sustainable current account deficit thus returned to centre stage in 1995. Furthermore, in a large number of countries, fiscal deficit reduction was also still an overriding policy concern, since past policies had achieved varying degrees of success (for example in Brazil, India, Viet Nam, Turkey and most west Asian countries, as analysed below). Yet in most developing regions, these perennial questions were also having to share attention with a more fundamental one: how to move from adjustment to growth. Indeed, even in many countries where the goal of stabilization had largely been achieved, the economic growth pay-off was still being awaited.

A few countries achieved high growth rates along with macroeconomic balance (see some of the examples in south and east Asia below), while others walked a tightrope between trying at the same time to control inflation and maintain high growth (these are exemplified by China and Viet Nam), or were able to bring down inflation sharply while avoiding recession (see the discussion of Brazil). However, in many countries a very long period of adjustment had gone by before growth returned. In Mexico, after seven years of adjustment, growth returned in 1989-1990, but it was modest and soon slowed down. A new bout of adjustment is again bringing growth to a halt in 1995. In too large a number of developing countries, stabilization and adjustment have yet to translate into growth (see the analysis of Africa below).

No agreed formula exists on how to obtain an acceleration of growth in indiidual countries. The diversity of starting-points and circumstances in developing countries still calls for national development strategies that define for each country its particular and most adequate way of insertion into the world economy. The fear of provoking a rapid rise in unemployment and general hardship has led in various countries to a cautious approach to privatization, lifting of certain labour regulations, elimination of subsidies, and other cuts in social expenditures (as in China. India, the Philippines, Viet Nam). Obstacles to a rise in domestic saving and investment and increases in productivity and competitiveness also differ from country to country.

Countries respond differently to adverse shocks, and not all are equally able to take advantage of favourable opportunities. Faced in the first half of the 1980s with a high debt burden, it took the Republic of Korea much less time than most Latin American debtors to reduce its debt-gross national product (GNP) and debtservice-to-exports ratios. Indeed, the ability to rapidly accommodate adjustment and structural change and the speedy adaptation to both shocks and favourable trends when they present themselves have been suggested as constituting a competitive advantage of the east Asian developing economies.7

In the overview of regional and country experiences that follows, a few of the main policy changes and results are examined. The focus is on those experiences that illustrate in the most telling way a specific policy dilemma and the way it is being addressed.

ADJUSTMENT IS (ONLY) A NECESSARY CONDITION FOR AFRICA

In Africa, adjustment has been the main focus of policy reform since the early 1980s. Yet the most striking fact about the economy of Africa is that economic growth remains grossly inadequate even some 15 years later, and per capita incomes in Africa have fallen almost steadily. Moreover, policy-making in Africa has frankly zigzagged over those 15 years; but in the end significant progress has been made in many countries, belying the rationale in some circles for "Afro-pessimism". In most cases, however, economic growth rates have not yet responded in such a manner as suggests that they are beginning to cut significantly into the continent's poverty.

This is not to deny that some countries, such as Mauritius, Morocco, and Tunisia, have made notable progress in macroeconomic and structural reforms and have seen significant improvements in living standards. Other countries that have made major adjustments include Egypt, Ethiopia, Ghana, Kenya. the United Republic of Tanzania, Uganda. Zambia and Zimbabwe, which have liberalized trade, prices, investment regimes and foreign exchange markets. In addition, such countries as Kenya, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Mauritius, Tunisia and Zimbabwe moved towards market-determined exchange rate systems, particularly in 1994 and early 1995. Moreover, Algeria, Angola and the Sudan, while still embroiled in civil strife, embarked once again in 1994 on major economic reform programmes after a period of virtual paralysis and policy reversals. Finally, recognizing the unsustainability of the Communaute financiere africaine (CFA) franc parity, the 14 African franc-zone countries and France devalued the CFA franc in January 1994, thereby simplifying what had been an extremely complex adjustment problem!

Implementation of structural reforms, in particular in the public sector, has often been slow for technical and sociopolitical reasons and liberalization efforts have at times been derailed by external shocks and political instability. None the less, many countries have made substantial progress in their structural adjustment programmes and some encouraging early signs of results from structural adjustment can be detected in certain countries for example, in Kenya. Uganda. and Zimbabwe as in the growth of non-traditional and manufacturing exports. The starting-point for such exports, however, is very small in nearly all sub-Saharan countries and has so far had a limited impact on economic growth and living standards for the majority of the population.

Progress in improving macroeconomic stability has with some notable exceptions, including Nigeria and Zaire been made in several countries. Egypt, Ethiopia, Kenya, Uganda and Zambia, in particular, achieved a considerable measure of price stability during 1994. The recent commitment to stabilization is well illustrated by the case of Zambia. It reduced its budget deficit through an approach called "cash budgeting", in which no expenditures were approved without matching revenues (except for debt payments), and through improved tax collection by the newly established Zambian Revenue Authority. Monetary policy was also quite tight, resulting in the offer of treasury bills at interest rates up to 178 per cent. As a result, the inflation rate was reduced from annual rates of 190 per cent in 1992 and 1993 to about 35 per cent in 1994.


Trade, finance and exchange rates

While overvalued exchange rates that were primed for a fall have been the common experience in Africa, a new phenomenon emerged during 1994 characterized by the fact that mainly market forces pushed exchange rates upward in certain countries. Exchange rates appreciated in real terms in Egypt, Kenya, Uganda. Zambia (it had already begun in 1993) and Zimbabwe, owing to higher foreign exchange inflows from greater export earnings (and workers' remittances in the case of Egypt) and larger inflows of aid and private finance, the latter attracted by recent foreign exchange and investment liberalization and high, recently decontrolled interest rates.

With lower inflation rates in all these countries, nominal interest rates could be lowered. In Kenya, rates fell by 16.5 percentage points over four months in mid-1994 and in Zambia by 50 percentage points between July 1993 and July 1994. Nevertheless, capital inflows to these countries continued to be strong.

In some countries, the reduction in interest rates lagged behind the improvement in inflation, with real interest rates remaining quite high, notably, in Zambia and Zimbabwe where they reached double digits. This has discouraged investment and expenditures on final goods and intermediate inputs, and led to bankruptcies and higher debt-servicing costs for Governments. In Zimbabwe, moreover, the high interest rates meant larger losses for parastatal enterprises which forced government subsidies to rise to cover the losses. Here was a case, in other words, of fiscal policy difficulties arising from the interest rate liberalization policy.*

As of early 1995, exchange rates had not retreated much from their higher levels, except in Kenya and Zambia. In Kenya, the shilling fell at the end of October 1994 but this only cancelled part of the earlier appreciation after the Government liberalized prices in the petroleum sector, the only area remaining under price controls. This caused a large demand for dollars by oil companies wishing to build up oil stocks. In Zambia, the exchange rate fell sharply in February 1995, when it was realized that a poor harvest owing to drought conditions had raised food import needs and thus substantially changed the balance-of-payments outlook. Funds then quickly moved out of the kwacha.

Egypt, the only one of the five countries with an exchange-rate regime that operated as a managed float, was called upon to devalue its appreciated currency in 1994, and it resisted. The Government argued that maintaining the currency peg was necessary to sustain capital inflows and that a devaluation would do little more than make imports more expensive. It would have little impact on aggregate export earnings, in which petroleum figures significantly. Instead, interest rates were reduced to discourage capital inflows and bring the exchange rate clown more gradually and the Government has reduced certain fees and other charges paid by exporters, as well as accorded them preferential interest rates and bank commissions on export financing.

The Egyptian debate on devaluation is a familiar one in Africa, where it is often argued that exports are not very sensitive to the exchange rate, unless it is excessively overvalued. One reason is that the price elasticities of demand and supply for Africa's traditional exports are rather small and the share of non-traditional exports with higher income and price elasticities is still quite low. Put somewhat differently, capacities to export non-traditional goods have to be built up over time. In addition, because the demand for imports has been quite constrained, increases in export revenues resulting from a devaluation are said to lead to higher imports. despite the fact that devaluation would make them more expensive, thereby leaving only a small net effect on the trade balance. On the other hand, devaluation can be an important instrument for counteracting the effects of a terms-of-trade decline on profitability and fiscal revenues.*

Focus on development

With few exceptions, as noted above, even the countries that made significant progress in policy reform have yet to see a sustained and substantial rise in the growth of real output, let alone real income. This is the inescapable conclusion even of the World Bank, which has been in the forefront of the effort to promote policy reform in Africa and mobilize resources for reform programmes.

In the latest in its series of reports on African adjustment. the Bank identified six sub-Saharan countries that had showed a large improvement in macroeconomic policies (Ghana, the United Republic of Tanzania, the Gambia, Burkina Faso, Nigeria, and Zimbabwe) and enjoyed a mean increase in the growth of gross domestic product (GDP) per capita of two percentage points between 19811986 and 1987-1991.* The mean growth in per capita GDP of the six "large-improvement" countries in the latter period was, however, only 1.1 per cent per year. With this growth rate, it will take 63 years to double GDP per capita. That is about the time it took the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland in the nineteenth century.0 The comparable period was considerably shorter for several other countries: it took Chile a dozen years. Mauritius a little more than a decade and China even less.

Disappointment in the economic growth rate of the adjusting countries in Africa is understandable, but it should not be surprising. In any event, it has become clearer over time that adjustment only creates necessary not sufficient conditions for development and that an output response need not be automatic, or ight take much longer than originally thought or hoped.0 This raises the question not so much whether adjustment has failed countries or countries have failed to adjust, as whether growth can be improved during the adjustment period. A few answers that have been suggested in recent studies, which by no means exhaust the subject, may be noted.

One disturbing conclusion from nearly all adjustment evaluations is that during adjustment, investment ratios often decline or respond very slowly to an improved environment.0 Factors explaining this include policy uncertainty, higher import costs resulting from devaluations and high interest rates, as well as the structural lack of access to finance; but the decline of public investment has frequently been even larger than that of private investment* and can in part explain the decline in private investment, because public investment in developing countries more often than not "crowds in" (is complementary to) private investment,

Public investment also has a significant direct effect on growth. In many parts of Africa, for example, production is curtailed by poor transport. Hence, even when budget deficits need to be reduced, greater efforts need to be made to increase public investment in infrastructure, such as rural roads, but also small irrigation systems, telecommunications and water and electricity systems, and direct it towards smallholders and small enterprises.0

Emphasis on smallholders and smalland medium-sized enterprises as regards public investment, training and creation of institutions has been justified not only on the basis of the small average size of African firms and farms, but also for its ability to create employment. In some countries, for example, Zambia and Zimbabwe. poverty and unemployment have increased since they embarked on adjustment, though drought is to blame as well. Governments have been increasingly concerned about unemployment, in particular among youth, and much interest has been directed towards the potential of small enterprises for absorbing labour.

Indeed, in a sample of five African countries, enterprises smaller than 50 employees absorbed on average 43 per cent of the increase in the labour force during the 1980s, with the figure varying between 92 per cent in a very small economy such as Swaziland to 25 per cent in Kenya, which has a more advanced manufacturing sector and a larger market.0

The sequencing and expected time-frame of structural adjustment in Africa have also been questioned. Import restrictions can be relaxed relatively quickly, as it involves only changing tariff and quantitative policy restrictions; but if this is done before there is an adequate tax base, government revenue suffers, and if the export response requires substantial time for investment and gestation (for example, for tree crops), the trade balance worsens. Then adjustment may be compromised and success is held hostage to the capacity to arrange adequate finance inevitably international public finance so as to carry the economy through the adjustment period.

In fact, import liberalization coupled with larger availability of foreign exchange have increased capacity utilization in the industrial sector of a number of countries, as more raw materials and spare parts became available. Flow-ever, liberalization of imports of consumer goods has had a negative impact in several countries, frequently affecting in particular the subsectors where expansion should be expected, namely the labour-intensive, technologically simple processing of primary commodities that have strong backward linkages.

Zimbabwe provides a case in point. It lowered trade barriers on textiles, reducing tariffs from 65 to 15 per cent in a period of five years, and it lowered a subsidy on cotton lint. In addition, this highly protected industry had successfully exported, including to South Africa under a preferential trade agreement. That expired at the end of 1992, whereupon South Africa imposed a 90 per cent tariff; also a 9 per cent Zimbabwe export subsidy was abolished in January 1994. The industry then suffered tremendously as a result of the combined effect of the trade liberalization, a drought in 1992 and high interest rates. The net result was a significant reduction in the number of textile and clothing firms and the release of many thousands of textile workers.

Similarly, South Africa is to liberalize its imports of textiles and clothing. The agreement reached with the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) in 1994 allows for a reduction of tariffs on clothing from 100 to 45 per cent over 12 years. Tariffs on textiles would also be cut by about half in 12 years and export subsidies are to be phased out by the end of 1997. First steps in trade liberalization were taken in 1994. However, the South African Board On Tariffs and Trade recommended lower final tariffs on clothing and textiles and phasing out over 10 years instead of 12. This proposal was accepted by the affected trade union in exchange for 4.5 billion rand in Government aid to fund training and new investment: but the fact that the Clothing Federation wants to move even faster and eliminate tariffs on fibres and yarns altogether in just a few years risks causing high unemployment in the textile sector.

An alternative approach advocated by several policy analysts argues for a more gradual scheduling of trade liberalization to allow more time for the enhancement of technological and entrepreneurial capabilities to export. The building of these capacities can be aided by measures such as educating and training the labour force, and the development of institutions that do research, control standards and quality, and provide finance, export promotion, marketing, and extension services. During the transitional phase of temporary and selective protection finance for these measures might in certain cases come from the earmarking of tariff revenues.s

Of course, there is a very discouraging precedent for this approach, namely the "temporary" Multifibre Arrangement to assist the adjustment of the textile industry in the industrialized countries which has lasted more than 30 years. While the textile industry in those countries indeed modernized behind the protective barriers, the barriers are only now beginning to be dismantled under the Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations agreement (see chapter VI on trade policy below). What thus seems most important in the instances in which the preceding policy advice is adopted is that government pressure be unremitting for evidence of enterprise adjustment behind the protective barrier and that strict limits be set to the period of protection.

"ROCKYROAD"TOSTABILIZATION IN LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN

Most countries in Latin America and the Caribbean still appear prone to inflation in the sense that price pressures seem to easily reignite actual inflation?, Price stabilization thus remains a primary objective of macroeconomic policies in most of the countries. The typical anti-inflation strategy has come to include fiscal austerity, tight monetary policy and trade liberalization.

In a broad-brush way, policy-making approaches among different countries in the region can be seen to have converged in the 1990s. Fiscal policy in most countries sought to reduce public deficits. Progress in tax reform, lower subsidies built into prices charged by public enterprises, renewed efforts to control tax evasion and income from privatizations have all increased revenues. On the other hand, rationalization of the civil service has proved to be one of the hardest goals to achieve, while expenditures remained low, especially for investment, and this has left a deteriorated infrastructure.

Another factor helping to slow down domestic price increases has been the increasing emphasis on bilateral and regional agreements to eliminate tariffs among trading partners, as well as overall trade liberalization. In 1995, the members both of MERCOSUR and of the Andean Pact started new customs unions with common external tariffs on all products, albeit with a list of temporary exceptions covering 15 per cent of all product categories. In addition, the strengthening of intraregional trade should create pressures to coordinate economic policies, helping to consolidate progress towards reform.

In addition, after a decade of more flexible regimes, the exchange rate is again being used as an anti-inflationary tool by several Governments, that is to say, a fixed rate or a crawling peg with a low, known, steady rate of depreciation serves as a nominal anchor. n In 1994, many countries, including Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Ecuador, Peru and of course Mexico used this approach. The dramatic adjustment experiences of three of these countries over the past 18 months have been indicative of the kinds of forces at play throughout the region.

What happened in Mexico?

Since 1988, Mexico has followed a strategy for macroeconomic stabilization and adjustment that possesses certain traditional features, such as the progressive tightening of its fiscal and monetary stance, and certain less common features, most notably the series of pactos. These are agreements in which representatives of the Government, employers, labour and farmers agree to coordinate and limit price and wage increases over specified periods so as to reduce inflationary expectations and remove the inherent wage-price spirals that in the past sent inflationary pressures in Mexico into high rates of actual inflation. In addition, the exchange rate served as a nominal anchor by being fixed to the dollar, or more precisely by being allowed to fluctuate within a band whose upper limit was fixed and whose lower limit fell by a constant amount per day (thus, a crawling peg).23

Until December 1994, the policy seemed to work. Inflation fell from 159 per cent in 1987 to only 7 per cent in 1994. The consolidated public-sector deficit, which had been 12.5 per cent of GDP in 1988, turned into a surplus by 1992.24 Import barriers were reduced and in 1994 the agreement establishing the North American Free Trade Area went into effect, helping to promote non-traditional exports (mainly manufactures), as well as imports.

In addition, the foreign debt crisis was resolved and Mexico returned to international capital markets. Inflows of funds both to purchase short-term government paper paying very high rates of interest even after taking account of inflation and to invest in Mexico's stock market burgeoned, along with direct investment, boosting official foreign exchange reserves in the process, even though the current account deficit widened substantially.

These successes Caine, however, at the cost of an increasingly overvalued real exchange rate; and although the sharp decline of GDP in the earlier 1980s was replaced by economic growth, it averaged only 3 per cent a year and still left GDP per capita in 1994 below the peak level in 1981. Moreover, despite the progress in stabilization and the large-scale financial inflows beginning in 1990, capital formation responded only weakly. Gross domestic investment only rose from 20 per cent of GDP in 1988 to 22 per cent in 1993. Even more troublesome and perhaps an indicator that the economic recovery was not on track for a sustained expansion gross domestic saving fell from 22 per cent of GDP in 1988 to only 16 per cent in 1993, a level that did not compare at all well with what was happening, for example, in the dynamic economies of Asia (see table A.11).

The commitment to trade liberalization, coupled with rising incomes after the long decline in the 1980s and the steady appreciation of the real peso exchange rate, led to increases in imports that far outpaced the growth of exports. Perhaps the fact that the mushrooming current account deficit was more than covered by net capital inflows through 1993 distracted attention from another fact, namely that the current account deficit had grown to the unsustainably high level of about 7 per cent of GDP.

Capital inflows, however, had already started to slow during 1994 in the face of troubling political events in the country (an armed uprising in the State of Chiapas. the assassination first of the leading candidate for President and then of a high official of the party in office). These events did not seem, however, to shake investor confidence in the Mexican economy, although it may have weakened it some. Certainly, a slowing of flows to Mexico could be related tnore simply to the rising interest rates in the United States, which made United States securities increasingly attractive as alternatives to placements in "emerging markets" such as Mexico.

Meanwhile, the political cycle had brought about a relaxation of fiscal policy, and it was not adjusted as the capital inflows began to slow. As economic activity responded to the stimuli, imports began to rise rapidly; the current account deficit reached $28 billion for the year, almost 8 per cent of GDP. Now, however, financial inflows were not covering the entire deficit and reserves had to be drawn upon if the exchange-rate policy was to be maintained, which had come to be seen as the sine qua non of the Government's economic strategy. Swap lines with Canada and the United States were readied to help Mexico defend the peso.

In the summer months, although financial market professionals grew suspicious about the sustainability of Mexico's policies, investor confidence seemed to hold. The Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), which Mexico had recently joined, began to include Mexico in its, semi-annual forecasting exercise; and in the outlook published in December, it, hared the Government's optimism for the coming year, forecasting that GDP would grow by 4 per cent in 1995 and 1996, that inflation would fall further and that the current account deficit would continue to widen each year as a share of GDP.155 The will to believe was great.

However. between 1 November and 20 December. the day of the devaluation, foreign reserves fell from $17 billion to $6.5 billion. At that point, the authorities had little choice but to devalue the peso, which they did by 13 per cent (officially they lowered the bottom of the permitted fluctuation band); but as the Government had not announced an economic adjustment package that could make the new exchange rate sustainable, investors' confidence in the peso collapsed. A rapid and powerful flight from the peso then forced the Government to let it float freely. The announcement of a stabilization package on 3 January did not stem the tide and by the end of that month the dollar value of the peso had dropped 40 per cent from its pre-devaluation level and reserves had fallen to $3.5 billion.

The critical deterioration of the Mexican situation at the end of January led to the unprecedented $53 billion international rescue plan. This consisted of a $20 billion share from the Exchange Stabilization Fund of the United States; an extraordinary $18 billion stand-by credit by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) (the largest and fastest agreement on a loan in the history of the Fund); a $10 billion short-term lending facility from the Bank for International


Settlements; a $3 billion loan from a consortium of international commercial banks (which did not materialize in the end); and $1 billion in short-term currency swaps from both Canada and a group of four South American countries.

The emergency package aimed to provide sufficient liquidity to Mexico so that holders of Mexican assets especially maturing short-term government securities called tesobonos would not abandon the peso. Indeed, the package seemed to cover the most immediate concern of investors which was that as the tesobonos matured, there would be sufficient foreign exchange to convert those peso funds into dollars if investors demanded it. Moreover, as tesobonos were linked to the dollar, the more the peso depreciated, the greater the peso payment required of the Government, and so successfully bolstering investor confidence in general and the exchange rate of the peso in particular would have significant budgetary implications.

Nevertheless, the economy was set back onto a difficult adjustment path, with the level of economic activity falling in response to emergency cuts in government expenditure and tighter monetary policy. The latter led to a higher domestic debt-servicing burden and coupled with the higher cost of imports financial distress in the business sector. Moreover, with the prospect of a virtual elimination of net capital inflows during 1995, total expenditure in the economy has had to be cut sharply. With output expected to fall as well, the total drop in absorption may be as much as 10 per cent of GDP. Thus, the cost of adjusting to the new situation will be higher unemployment and lower consumption and investment, plus reduced real wages and real income for most of the population, effected through a substantial jump in inflation.

Within the context of considerable poverty, deteriorating income distribution and the uncertainty associated with a transition to a more democratic political system, there is a risk that the new austerity programme could fuel increasing social and political unrest. On the other hand, the new set of relative prices following the devaluation indeed, as of early 1995 the peso was probably undervalued in trade-related terms should encourage the movement of labour and capital from the non-traded sector to a more competitive tradable,' sector. Given the reasons for long-run confidence in the Mexican economy and the opportunities in an expanding world economy as forecast for 1995 and 1996, an export-led recovery might begin as soon as next year. Chile had such a turn around after its drastic adjustment in 1982.26

Ripple effect on the Argentine strategy

At the beginning of the decade, Argentina adopted the most extreme form of fixed-peg system and until the Mexican crisis the policy seemed to be working smoothly. Argentina's 1991 Convertibility Law fixed the exchange-rate parity against the dollar and provided that it could only be changed with the approval of the Congress. As under a monetary system called a -currency board", the Law also provided that the monetary base had to be backed by foreign reserves. This prevents the central bank from discretionary issuance of money, such as for financing a budget deficit, and ensures a firm limit to the growth of the money supply. As long as confidence exists in the capacity and commitment of the Government to maintain the policy, it serves to contain inflation. Indeed. Argentine inflation had fallen to the single-digit level by 1993.

 The Argentine system also requires, however, that the growth of domestic money and bank credit in the economy hinge on the balance of payments. As long as external financial flows surged to Argentina as to other Latin American countries, it meant that money and credit expanded as needed by the growing economy. Indeed, local money was not fully essential to that growth, as Argentine residents are permitted to hold dollar accounts at local banks and the dollar circulates alongside the peso; but the Mexican crisis caused international portfolio managers to rethink holding funds in Argentina, and this presented a major challenge to the system.

It could be argued that portfolio managers should have been more discriminating. Although the Argentine peso was substantially overvalued, Argentina's external financial situation was less vulnerable than that of Mexico. While the current account deficit was almost 4 per cent of GDP, exports were growing steadily as imports were slowing, owing to slowing growth of domestic consumption. Also, in Argentina, as was not the case in Mexico with its high dependence on short-term capital inflows, a more substantial share of the country's financing was in the form of direct investment. Finally, in contrast with Mexico's loss of $20 billion of reserves in 1994, Argentina's foreign exchange reserves fell less than $1 billion. This notwithstanding, in January 1995, one month into the Mexican crisis, Argentina's reserves fell an additional $1.4 billion, shrinking the domestic monetary base and creating a major liquidity problem in the financial sector. For the first 3 months of 1995, Argentine reserves fell a total of about $3 billion.

In view of the financial turmoil, Argentina's central bank announced mea,ures that increased the "dollarization" of the system. These included the conversion into dollars of all peso-denominated deposits at the central bank (20 per cent of the monetary base or over 83 billion as of mid-January 1995). In addition, the central bank eliminated the spread it had applied to the sale of dollars for pesos (0.002 pesos per dollar), reducing transactions costs of purchasing dollars. Dollar-denominated domestic deposits at local banks had already grown to over half of the total. The idea was that a full dollarization would remove the risk of a speculatively driven devaluation.

Even so, the Argentine banking system itself seemed at risk, whatever the currency in use. Bank deposits had fallen an estimated $6 billion or 14 per cent in the first three months of 1995 and there was concern about the liquidity of the system and restoring the confidence of depositors. The Government ibus sought to rebuild confidence through first one and then a second package fiscal adjustments, as well as by seeking an external financial assistance package to rebuild liquidity being drained by the capital outflows under the currency-board mechanism. Moreover, in addition to strengthening public finances, the Government planned a restructuring of the financial system, including the privatization of provincial banks.

The financial package comprising loans from IMF, the World Bank, the I nter-American Development Bank and a bond issue to be subscribed to by the corporate sector entailed commitments of $6.5 billion, which would help sustain economic activity. However, the two sets of fiscal measures aimed to turn an anticipated $4.6 billion government deficit in 1995 into a $2 billion surplus. This would aggravate the contractionary impact of the exogenous turn around in private capital flows. Policy measures having the effect of further undermining economic growth in 1995 were thus a necessary cost in the present context of maintaining the viability of the currency-board type of exchange-rate system.

Brazil's innovative attack on inflation

Brazil's consumer price index had risen at an average annual rate of 1,213 per cent over the five years from 1988 to 1992 and by almost 2,500 per cent in 1993.= Clearly, inflation had become resistant to policy measures to control it, although the political constraints on policy design had also hampered policy. Yet under the latest effort, the "Real Plan", the inflation of consumer prices fell from 49 per cent in June 1994 to 8 per cent in July 1994, and continued to decline, reaching 1.6 per cent in January 1995. This was achieved without recession (GDP grew almost 6 per cent in 1994 and economic growth continues strong in 1995) and without price controls. Last, but not least, the Plan had high rates of public approval, catapulting the finance minister who had launched it to the country's presidency.

The programme had three stages, as announced in December 1993 by Fernando Henrique Cardoso, Minister of Finance. = The first stage included various measures to reduce the budget deficit. The second was the introduction of a unit of account for economic and financial calculations that would be stable in real terms (with its nominal value changing every day according to the daily rate of inflation). The third stage was the conversion of this unit of account into the new currency of the country, at a semi-fixed par rate with the dollar.

The first stage entailed balancing the "operational" federal budget, sometimes called the inflation-corrected budget.= It required a set of constitutional reforms in the fiscal area to guarantee a more permanent budgetary equilibrium. Although Congress failed to vote on the proposed fiscal reform in 1994, it allowed the Government to make deep budget cuts in 1994 and 1995 through a constitutional amendment establishing the Social Emergency Fund. The Fund was to receive 20 per cent of revenues that had previously been earmarked for particular expenditures, with the Government now empowered to decide how or whether to spend the funds.

The economic team that formulated the Real Plan had identified the disequilibria of the public-sector accounts as the fundamental cause of Brazil's chronic inflation. = Federal budgets were being approved by the Congress with large deficits, but since taxes were indexed to the price level, inflation helped to raise tax revenues. The Government also captured resources through the standard "inflation tax", through which people who hold money lose purchasing power that the Government appropriates by printing and spending money. Moreover, as expenditures were budgeted in nominal terms, inflation compressed authorized spending in real terms. Ex post, inflation closed what was, ex ante, a budget deficit and thus the Brazilian Government became dependent on inflation to balance its accounts. The purpose of the first stage of the Real Plan, accordingly, was to eliminate such dependence.=

In the diagnosis of Mr. Cardoso's economic team, however, inflation in Brazil could not be fought with fiscal targets alone. Even if the operational budget was in balance, inflation would keep the nominal budget deficit at a high level and thus the "broad money supply" would continue to expand, feeding back into additional inflation .= Moreover, in an economy in which indexation was generalized, inflation acceleration would be inevitable. According to this diagnosis, elimination of the nominal budget deficit required attacking inflation at the monetary level.

The second stage, therefore, was to prepare a monetary reform. The general course of the monetary reform programme had already been long debated by the members of the economic team, and involved a two-stage procedure of substitution of the old inflated currency with a new stable one, first as a unit of value and then as a means of payment.33 Thus, on 1 March 1994, the Government introduced a new unit of account, the Unit of Real Value (URV), set roughly at a par with the dollar. The value of the URV would change daily, according to the day's inflation, in order to maintain a stable real value. With few exceptions, all contracts in the economy could be redenominated in this new unit of account. Except for wages, housing rents, schooling bills, and public-sector prices and tariffs, the terms of these conversions could be freely agreed among the contracting parties, provided that indexation clauses of less than one year were abolished (direct dollar denomination of contracts remained forbidden as before).

Taking into account that according to the previous wage law, wages were to be adjusted every four months, it was determined that at the inception of the URV on 1 March 1994, all wages would be converted at their average real values in the previous four-month period. The political passage of this measure in due time required that similar procedures be imposed for the conversion of housing rents and school bills.

The main purpose of the second stage of the plan was to align the times at which the most important prices in the economy changed, because the existence of overlapping indexed contracts with varying lags meant that at any moment in time there was a significant dispersion of prices in the economy, with some prices having recently been readjusted and others lagging far behind. Under such circumstances, a sudden end to the inflationary process would catch some prices at their peak real values, and others at their trough. Such price misalignments would inevitably impose additional inflationary pressures on the economy, as previously existing indexation clauses would continue to force up the prices that were lagging behind. This lagged indexation mechanism accounted for the so-called inertial component of Brazilian inflation, as distinct from the structural part that was associated with the ex ante operational budget deficit.

Making the URV into a universal indexer, as a preparation for replacing the currency, was the most novel and controversial part of the plan. The underlying idea was that once the URV became the universal unit of account, prices would be quoted in units of URV and the way would be prepared to transform the URV itself into a new money, the non-indexed real. The inertial self-feeding component of inflation in Brazil, the "inflationary memory", would be abolished.

At the same time, the more perfect the indexation of prices in the economy, the more susceptible it became to a hyper-inflation spiral, because any new inflationary impulse would be transmitted almost instantaneously to all prices in the system. In the end, through a combination of precautionary measures, compromises imposed by the political process" and some luck with the social experiment, inflation acceleration in the URV period was not extreme, except in the last few clays preceding the introduction of the real, as economic agents adopted "precautionary" price increases.

Finally, after a four-month period of contract conversions, on 1 July 1994, the Government started issuing the U RV, now renamed the real, as the new currency of the country. The external value of the real was set at no less than one dollar. s In conformity with the initial programme statement and the pledge to make policy transparent that is, to "do everything as announced, announcing everything that would be done" a 30-day advance notice was given of the monetary conversion date. The Government also set a conversion rate of one real to 2,750 eruzeiros reals (this was the value of one URV in eruzeiros reais on 30 June 1994) as the rate for the replacement of the money stock and more generally for the redenomination into reals of contracts and prices not yet converted from cruzeiros reals into URVs.

This essentially completed the three-stage monetary reform that constituted the Real Plan. With the substitution of the real for the cruzeiro reals as the legal tender of the country, all contracts that had been previously set in URV units but payable in eruzeiro reals now became payable in URV units as well, that is, in reals. The switch to the real was probably the largest currency replacement ever. Over 50 million bank accounts were converted to the new currency from midnight 30 June. During a period of two weeks, within which the old currency notes were being swapped for reals, both currencies were legal tender. The population went through this period carrying pocket calculators everywhere for their daily shopping in two currencies.


Implementation of the final stage of the Real Plan, of course, was not exactly according to the theoretical model. Some "inflationary memory" was carried over into the real and some indexation, in particular of wages, had to remain; but the decline of inflation was dramatic, not only because the Real Plan gave the economy a break with the old inflation, but also because new inflationary pressures could be contained.

In other words, from the introduction of the real to the end of 1994, two developments helped to contain inflation: appreciation of the real owing to large net capital inflows and a trade liberalization that encouraged a rapid increase in imports. The large balance-of-payments surpluses that had occurred since 1992 gave the Government foreign reserves on a cash basis of $40 billion at the moment of the monetary conversion. The merchandise trade balance had a surplus that was running at about $1 billion per month; but the sudden end of high inflation fostered a surge in the demand for consumer goods, which combined with lowered real import prices (owing to appreciation and import liberalization) to gradually erode the trade surplus.

The explosion in consumption had been fostered by the abrupt reduction in the inflation tax Is Inch had affected all holders of money, but especially the poorest who had been less able to preserve the value of their money through indexed financial operations. In addition, consumer credit, which was minimal in the period of high inflation, nearly doubled between June and October 1994. Finally, the level of total employment by the end of 1994 was nearly 5 per cent higher than at the end of 1993, reflecting the expansion of economic activity.

The Government reacted to the initial rise in private demand and its potential inflationary push by tightening credit and further liberalizing imports. With large private inflows of capital continuing, the country could have afforded a current account deficit as a trade-off for the consolidation of the stabilization programme. It was anticipated that the pegged exchange rate would become overvalued, as elsewhere, but the original timing for dealing with the overvalued currency might have been the first anniversary of the real on 1 July 1995. However, the crisis in Mexico changed that.

By year end, the trade surplus had thus been transformed into a trade deficit exactly when external conditions were becoming less favourable in the wake of the Mexican crisis. Brazil's foreign reserves started declining. Corrections to the original course became unavoidable. Besides credit tightening to cool down the expansion in consumption, the Government opted for devaluation. The Real Plan had fixed the nominal parity with the dollar, but in its managed float the Central Bank had been maintaining an exchange rate of 85 cents to the dollar (and an informal band said to be 83-86 cents). In March 1995. the Government officially set the band at 86-90 cents until May 2 and 86-98 thereafter. This in fact set off an attack on the real, and after the Central Bank spent several billions of dollars of reserves defending it, a new band of 88-93 was set, which the Government expects to keep. The Government also temporarily reinstated certain import duties that had been reduced in the last two years. In March, import duties for a list of 109 consumer goods, mainly cars and appliances, more than doubled to 70 per cent.

These measures to deal with the balance of payments and reduce dependence on foreign capital inflows had a cost: inflation has begun to rise. Although the general price increase was still below 2 per cent in March 1995, consumer prices rose closer to 3 per cent, and inflation was again accelerating according to all indexes. Thus, it became even more crucial for the Government to engage in difficult negotiations with Congress and society to approve the more permanent measures of fiscal adjustment and all the other reforms necessary to contain inflationary pressure, involving the relations between central and state Governments, the issue of the financial fragility of state banks. the financing of social security and the framework for privatizations. The battle therefore continues.

WINDS OF CHANGE ACROSS ASIA

In the popular mind, developing Asia has the world's greatest contrasts. It includes developing countries with some of the lowest and highest GNPs per capita in the world, the country with the largest population in the world and some of the smallest islands. It has varying strategies for development and differing trend rates of growth of output, including the highest. However, across the region over the past few years, Governments have been newly confronting macroeconomic adjustment imperatives and applying essentially the same broad approach seen elsewhere in the developing world, albeit customized to meet local conditions. The discussion below aims to highlight significant regional and country instances of this common process.

West Asia: adjusting to low oil prices
The main goal of economic reform in west Asia has become adjustment to the fact that the era of record high oil prices has ended and that policies undertaken under the assumption that such high prices would persist are no longer sustainable. Not only have prices of crude petroleum fallen to levels far below those of the mid-1970s in terms of international purchasing power, but the prospect is that adequate supplies of crude oil over the medium term will prevent prices from rising significantly above their current levels in real terms.37

The adjustment requirement applies not only to oil-exporting countries, where lower oil prices brought large budget deficits and balance-of-payments difficulties, but also to the other countries in the region, which have had to adapt to changed conditions in neighbouring oil-exporters, and certain of which, such as Jordan and Lebanon, have advanced in their stabilization and adjustment programmes and resumed economic growth; nevertheless, the present discussion will focus on the oil exporters, most of whom are still being confronted with the initial contractionary phases of economic reform, mainly in the form of austerity programmes, including in the Islamic Republic of Iran, Saudi Arabia and Yemen.

More generally, a broad consensus has emerged in most countries of the region on the need to diversify their economies, rely less on oil and adopt market-oriented economic reforms. The oil price dive of 1993 only made the necessity of a reform process more inescapable.

Focus on the budget

Given the large economic role of the public sector during the years of the oil boom, attention has focused on rethinking that role and on curtailing government expenditures in particular. Since government expenditure can be highly importintensive, especially for investment goods and military equipment, budgetary cutbacks also assist the necessary adjustment of the balance of payments.

The problem is that in spite of their enormous oil wealth, most of the oilexporting countries of the region have been confronting persistent budget deficits, intractable high expenditures, and a decline in investment. In other words, the development strategy during the oil boom masked fundamental problems that contributed to the present disappointing economic performance. Lack of an appropriate tax structure, large subsidies for public services and some productive sectors, government control of production often leading to inefficiencies, and a system of governance that lacked transparency and accountability became unsustainable as soon as the oil boom ended.

The fall in oil prices in the second half of the 1980s greatly reduced government revenues. Though the fall in revenues was cushioned by drawing down savings, this was a short-term expedient and after some time lower revenues resulted in budget cut-backs. Then, the consequences of the Gulf war and the high costs incurred by Saudi Arabia and others exacerbated the financial difficulties of the region.38

That a major component of government expenditure in some of the countries has been for military preparedness has had consequences for the adjustment process. Indeed, the opportunity cost of the continued military build-up in several countries has been the needed investment in long-term economic development. The consequences of the Gulf war continue to be a source of regional and international friction, but significant progress in the Middle East peace process may create a wide scope for regional integration and cooperation, which could yield significant economic benefits.

Meanwhile, the pressure for budgetary correction is unremitting. While adoption of economic reforms that involve the introduction of taxation and removal of subsidies remains a major challenge to the countries of the Gulf Cooperation Council, a number of them have undertaken measures aimed at privatization and a reorganization of public spending. These include cuts in service payments and government transfers, measures to reduce imports and rescheduling projects.

Saudi Arabia, in particular, cut its budget spending by 19 per cent in 1994 and announced a 6 per cent spending cut for 1995, in addition to a number of other fiscal measures, among them, an increase in the prices of petroleum products, water, electricity and telephone charges. While these changes represent a drastic shift in policy, they do not yet alter significantly the subsidy system, as some of these increases apply only to large customers and not to the population at large.

Saudi Arabia also announced in 1994 its intention to privatize a large number of key government institutions in sectors such as electricity, telephone. water, oil refining and petrochemicals and the national airline. Given the high liquidity in the local market as well as the large financial resources of the private sector abroad, such plans are likely to encourage private investment and entice capital inflows. They are also likely to encourage foreign investors to enter into new joint venture projects with Saudi Arabian investors. Notwithstanding these drastic changes, Saudi Arabia, like most other Gulf States, still restricts foreign ownership in any project to a maximum of 49 per cent.

In addition, Oman has recently implemented new corporate and personal taxes, has started privatization and has allowed foreign investors to own up to 65 per cent of the shares in projects in the country. In the United Arab Emirates, while the Government has ruled out the introduction of taxes and still subsidizes a wide range of items, it has been pursuing policies based on freemarket principles and has aimed at diversifying the economy and encouraging free trade. The Government introduced, however, in 1994 a wide range of higher tariffs and fees, including a raising of the cost of entry visas, vehicle registrations and driving-licences.

The Syrian Arab Republic is pursuing policies towards gradual deregulation and the opening up of its economy to the private sector. In the Islamic Republic of Iran, cuts in subsidies and enforcement of tax regulations. combined with efforts to reduce imports, have succeeded in reducing the budget deficit and led to a current account surplus in 1994.

Economic "adjustment" in Iraq is sui generis, since the economy is required to operate under United Nations sanctions in effect since 1990, owing to unresolved political difficulties with the international community. With the United Nations embargo on all imports (except for essential humanitarian needs) and all exports. including oil exports (except to Jordan). with major destruction resulting from the war and with unresolved political situations continuing in parts of the country, the economic situation is distorted in a unique manner. The economic role of the Government remains large, even if it is carried out under budgetary pressure. It operates a rationing system for basic consumer goods (although it has necessarily been scaled back by steps, including in 1994) and petroleum products are sold at artificially low prices. Not all household needs can be met within such channels, however, and very high prices are common outside the system.

In addition, although the official exchange rate has been 0.31 dinars per dollar, the black-market rate has been on the order of 550 dinars per dollar. The market mainly serves as a vehicle for expatriate Iraqis to send funds to family members and for others to take resources out of the country, despite United Nations-imposed limitations and prohibitions on financed transactions regarding Iraq. In late 1994, in what amounted to a large devaluation. the Government allowed a number of authorized foreign exchange dealers to buy foreign currency at about the black-market rate. This has helped the Central Bank tap a significant new source of dollars, although a differential is again opening up between the exchange rate offered by the black market and that available from authorized dealers.

Stabilization in India, the Philippines and Viet Nam

The late 1980s and the beginning of the 1990s saw the increasing adoption of stabilization and adjustment policies by south and east Asian economies. India, the Philippines and Viet Nam are three notable, if very different, examples. Stabilization policies in each of these countries followed familiar patterns, except that they were also part and parcel of deeper structural changes in policy that grew out of the unique economic history of each country.

India has followed a development strategy since its independence in 1947 that has left it largely closed and centrally guided, albeit mainly through a market economy with a large state sector and considerable controls on the operation of the private sector. Although there have been various movements to liberalize and deepen India's integration into the world economy over the decades, the degree of change set in motion in the wake of the severe balance-of-payments crisis of 1991 is potentially the most significant.

Liberalization was instituted in several areas in India quite rapidly in three to four years, while fundamental reforms have been much more gradual. Taxes have been substantially streamlined and lowered to improve incentives for private production and consumption. To promote private domestic and foreign investment, the system of licensing of private investment was largely eliminated and many areas of transport and infrastructure previously reserved for the public sector have been gradually opened to private and foreign investment. Restrictions on foreign direct investment were also significantly eased. Large reductions of tariffs and elimination of quantitative restrictions on imports of intermediate and capital goods were introduced to lower the cost of domestic production. The financial market has been opened to foreign investment and the currency was made fully convertible in the current account by late 1994. The banking and insurance sectors have also been gradually reformed and the commercial loan rate was decontrolled in late 1994.

The Philippines is reaping the cumulative results of halting reforms begun in the 1980s and intensified after the fall of the Government in a peaceful uprising of the urban population in January 1986.40 Reforms under the successor regime included broadening of the tax base, restructuring of banking institutions, liberalization of imports of intermediate goods and freeing of agricultural prices and marketing. Continued reform has included liberalization of trade, foreign exchange transactions and foreign direct investment, de-monopolization of industrial sectors, opening of infrastructure sectors to private investment and privatization of public enterprises. These measures have further improved domestic markets and revived foreign investment and trade.

Viet Nam has been reforming its system radically since 1989, and structural changes have been rapid, transforming a centrally planned economy into an outward-oriented, market-based system. Important measures included the legalization of private ownership, the streamlining of public enterprises, the decollectivization of agricultural production, price and exchange-rate decontrol and trade and foreign investment liberalization. As a result, the production and ownership structures of the economy have changed significantly: there is a much larger service sector and a significantly larger share of production is in private hands!' In addition, the economy is more open, for example, with exports and imports contributing a substantially larger share of output and incipient rapid growth in labour-intensive export manufacturing.

In all three countries, the implementation of the new policies was facilitated by favourable political conditions. The programme in India was put in place by a newly elected Government and in the Philippines the smooth transition to a newly elected Government significantly improved political stability. In Viet Nam, an existing Government chose a total reorientation of economic development strategy after an earlier series of failures in economic policy.

Rigour and flexibility in stabilization policies

Firm implementation of stabilization policies could be found in all three countries. At first, standard stabilization measures a large currency devaluation and foreign exchange liberalization, a sharp rise in interest rates and the shrinking of the central government budget deficit were put in place. These policies yielded significant reductions in inflation in a very short period of time; but they also aggravated existing infrastructure bottlenecks and other problems, such as unemployment and the low levels of social expenditures. Despite significant progress, substantial imbalances still remained in domestic budgets or external accounts or both.

Stabilization measures in India in 1991 were put in place in response to an imminent balance-of-payments crisis and almost depleted foreign reserves. The measures, supplemented by temporary emergency import restrictions, promptly resulted in substantial improvement in the external balance and foreign reserves. The trend was sustained by robust export growth and modest import growth and the current account was almost restored to balance. In addition, with a surge of portfolio investment inflow in response to improved economic stability and economic prospects, foreign reserve levels soared to almost eight months of imports by 1994.

India's budget deficit was reduced by cut-backs in subsidies, public investment and social expenditures. It declined from almost 10 per cent of GDP in 1991 to 7 per cent, remaining high because of interest payments on a large debt and pressures to maintain some price subsidies and the large public sector. Inflation declined steadily from a peak of 17 per cent in 1991 to 7-8 per cent in 1993, but has since headed upward again into double digits. The resurgence was the consequence of the acceleration of money supply growth owing to monetization of large capital inflows and the increase in government-controlled prices.

The new stabilization policy in the Philippines involved both a sharp reduction of the fiscal deficit and monetary tightening. In addition, the debt owed to foreign commercial banks was successfully restructured in 1992, reducing the burden of debt servicing on the budget; but austere fiscal policies delayed muchneeded infrastructure investment, while tight monetary policy caused private investment to stagnate. Moreover, the Government held the legal minimum wage unchanged through 1993 which, in turn, had a steadying influence on wage rates in the formal sector. Inflation fell significantly from 14 per cent in 1991 to 7.5 per cent in 1993, and has since remained at that low level.

Even with prudent management of the exchange rate, the current account deficit of the Philippines has remained large and persistent (almost 6 per cent of GDP in 1993; over 5 per cent in 1994). Upward pressure on the exchange rate created by high interest rates and inflow of capital have contributed to the deficit. A large share of the capital inflow was in the form of portfolio investment, giving rise to concerns about sustainability of the current account deficit.

In Viet Nam, austere stabilization measures included drastic credit restriction and sharp interest rate hikes. As a result, real interest rates turned strongly positive in 1989 for the first time in many years. The fiscal deficit was reduced sharply from over 11 per cent in 1989 to under 4 per cent by 1992, under a combination of expenditure reductions arid revenue increases, the former mainly from cut-backs in capital investment. In addition, there has been a shift in deficit financing from central bank monetization to debt securities purchased by Vietnamese individuals. Inflation plummeted from 170 per cent annually in 1988 to approximately 30 per cent in 1989, and to a low of 5.5 per cent by 1993.

After initial stabilization measures, continued vigilance and flexibility in macroeconomic management have been necessary in all three countries to maintain results. Policy response to fluctuations in macroeconomic balances have been prompt. For example, Viet Nam drastically reduced credit to the state sector in 1992 in order to control accelerating money supply growth. In the Philippines, monetary tightening measures were promptly taken when increased public investment in 1993 increased money supply growth significantly and undermined the exchange rate.

At the same time, the surging inflow of capital resulting from the opening of the economy to world trade and financial markets has complicated macroeconomic policies in India and the Philippines. Each country has had to coordinate and adjust policies simultaneously on various fronts. In India, for example, where the currency is under a managed float, growth of the money supply accelerated owing to the same processes noted earlier in other regions that experienced large capital inflows, aggravating inflationary pressures. Out of a reluctance to allow inflation to deteriorate further, the exchange rate also appreciated in nominal terms in 1994. Owing to the effect of the inflation and the nominal appreciation, the currency appreciated significantly in real terms, with an adverse effect on export growth. In the Philippines, there was a similar effect on the exchange rate, resulting in a dampening effect on export growth.

 With a sharp slow-down in capital inflows since the end of 1994, noted earlier in the discussion of Latin America and the Caribbean, the upward pressure on the exchange rate of India was eased. For the Philippines, the result has been a sharp drop in the exchange rate in February 1995, reflecting the concerns of financial markets over the country's large current account deficit. Consequently, macroeconomic policy in the Philippines has had to change focus: interest rates were raised to stem depreciation, even at the risk of slowing down economic growth. India and Viet Nam have also tightened monetary policy in 1995, not because of a run on the currency, but in order to restrain rising inflation.

Prospects for sustained reform

There was a significant pick-up in economic growth in India and the Philippines by 1994 and in Viet Nam from early in the adjustment period. Moreover, even though output did not grow for two years in the Philippines, in none of the three countries did it actually decline during the adjustment period, as has been the common experience elsewhere. In India the growth of GDP slipped to 2 per cent and in Viet Nam to under 4 per cent, but all three countries are expected to see GDP grow in 1995 by at least 6 per cent (and Viet Nam by considerably more). This, of course, makes the changes required by adjustment easier to absorb.

Nevertheless, there were significant tensions. For example, the high incidence of poverty, unemployment and underemployment was aggravated by stabilization and reform and has not improved significantly since. There had been little growth in industrial employment in the Philippines in the 1980s and manufacturing employment growth in India had also been slow, providing few job opportunities for the growing labour force, and leaving high levels of underemployment in the agricultural and service sectors. In Viet Nam as well, underemployment was serious in agriculture and industry, exacerbated by large-scale military demobilization and the consolidation of state enterprises.a

These conditions have made it more difficult to implement further reforms that would have a direct negative impact on employment, consumer prices or social expenditures. As a result, progress in privatization and/or restructuring of state enterprises has been very slow in the three countries. In India, price subsidies and restriction on private enterprise lay-offs and closures and protection of markets for small enterprises have remained largely unchanged. Continued reform and structural adjustment will need to address poverty reduction through employment growth and increased investment in human resources and social services. This notwithstanding, both the Philippines and Viet Nam have made some progress in generating labour-intensive employment through growth in manufactured exports and foreign direct investment.

The experience thus far in all three countries points to the importance, on the one hand, of regaining and maintaining macroeconomic stability, and on the other, of creating employment and alleviating poverty, while intensifying reform. In India, both legal and financial systems continue to be developed to support a more decentralized economy. More fundamental and politically controversial reforms remain to be instituted: the elimination of price subsidies, restrictions on private enterprise downsizing and a ban on the import of consumer goods, along with a re-examination of the special rules applying to small enterprises and the reform and privatization of public enterprises. These measures impinge directly on the role of public ownership, consumer goods prices, employment and the traditional practice of protection of small consumer goods enterprises. Their implementation is dependent on broad-based political support for the Government.

In the Philippines, reform of land tenure remains an important area of change to be implemented, as do privatization of state enterprises and continued development of the financial sector. Development of labour-intensive exports through domestic and foreign investment is ongoing. Viet Nam as well continues to promote the growth of labour-intensive exports by reducing disincentives in the trading system. It is beginning to institute measures to reduce the regional concentration of growth by promoting agricultural and manufacturing investment outside the major urban areas. The development of infrastructure for a market-oriented economy that is, a supporting legal system, a financial system that can efficiently mobilize and allocate funds for investment and then improving of conditions for competition in domestic markets is a priority. In addition, the still dominant public industrial sector needs to be reformed and privatized while development of the small private manufacturing sector is dependent on improved access to credit.

The struggle against inflation in China

 Although China, like Viet Nam, has been undergoing a process of deep transformation from a centrally planned to a market-based economy, it began its transition much earlier and is farther along in many respects. The effort to rein in inflation, after several years of policy trial and error, succeeded in the early 1990s, albeit at the cost of a sharp slow-down in the growth of output. However, output growth quickly climbed back to double-digit levels and inflation has since begun to accelerate to high levels once again (see tables A.3 and A.I3).

In its current adjustment effort, China is creating new institutions and tools of macroeconomic policy at the same time as it seeks to so apply them as to dampen the growth of aggregate spending. However, there are constraints: The Government sees itself facing a particularly difficult one which limits its freedom of action, 'tamely the political and social imperative to avoid mass urban unemployment, which is what would ensue from highly contractionary policies or the sudden withdrawal of financial support from the large, lossmaking state enterprises.

In any event, positive results of new policy measures adopted since 1993 were expected to begin to appear in 1994 and 1995. So far, however, the package of reforms, including increases in interest rates and even outright administrative orders to control credit ceilings and to ban certain non-productive investment projects, have all had limited success at curtailing fixed investment expansion and inflation. As of 1994, macroeconomic imbalances continued to intensify and were most sharply reflected in the 24 per cent rate of inflation, which constituted the highest level in the history of the republic.

Ironically, the high rate of inflation in 1994 was partly policy-induced. Salaries of civil servants were increased. Procurement prices for agricultural products were raised in order to stimulate the production of grain and some agricultural raw materials such as cotton. Subsequently, the official retail prices of staples such as flour and rice sold to urban residents were raised. Adverse weather conditions floods in several southern provinces in June 1994 and drought in the north also contributed to higher prices of food, which played a leading role in the acceleration of inflation during 1994. Combined with increases in the price of agricultural inputs, the rate of inflation in rural areas was higher than the national average in some months, reversing the past pattern of relatively higher urban inflation.

The factors mentioned hikes in civil servants' wages and in some administered prices, and bad weather are transitory in nature. However, other causes of inflation are structural and reflect the problems China faces at the current stage of its economic reform programme. For instance, investment demand persistently grows beyond the availability of capital goods. Also, the increasing integration of China into the world economy complicates macroeconomic management, as the inflow of foreign capital has made controlling the growth of the domestic money supply more difficult.*

More generally the tools for macroeconomic management have remained rather rudimentary and thus the Chinese Government has sought to create more appropriate mechanisms. In the financial sector, in particular, the existing banking system was restructured to enable the People's Bank of China to function as a western-style central bank, "Policy banks" were set up in 1994 to carry out lending in support of government industrial policies while stateowned specialized banks were turned into commercial banks. This notwithstanding, financial-sector reform is seen to be an ongoing process in China.

In addition, the exchange-rate system was simplified during 1994. First, in the external sector, the "double-track" foreign exchange rate regime was unified to the market rate on 1 January 1994.* This effected a 33 per cent devaluation of the official exchange rate, at which about 20 per cent of transactions were conducted just before the rate unification.* By simplifying the exchange-rate system, the Government essentially gave up the practice of subsidizing some imports by taxing a portion of the earnings of exporters, thus eliminating one form of price distortion. During the course of the year, China also liberalized trade by reducing some tariffs and abolishing some licences and quotas.

Meanwhile, a new tax system centred around a value-added tax was introduced as part of a fiscal reform effort. The new tax system was intended, inter alia, to put more revenues into the hands of the central Government, the growth in whose revenues had not paralleled the pace of economic growth in the country, as decentralization has shifted considerable power to local levels of government. The Government also continued to carry out the "corporatization" of state-owned enterprises. A new Company Law went into effect in July 1994, which establishes a unified legal basis for the incorporation and operation of companies. On a limited experimental basis, 100 state-owned enterprises were chosen to be converted into joint-stock companies, or if necessary to be forced into bankruptcy.

These, however, are only tentative steps towards rebuilding the microeconomic foundations of the system. The state sector, which accounts for over half of China's GDP, still operates under the "soft budget constraint", which means, in effect, that microeconomic agents in this sector can largely ignore interest rates, tax policy and prices in their decision-making. This poses a more serious problem for China's ability to achieve sustainable economic growth without recurring high rates of inflation. It also undermines the effectiveness of the new macroeconomic policy tools that Government reform measures intend to put into place.

 The need to undertake fundamental reforms in the state enterprise sector is becoming ever more urgent as reforms in other areas have been implemented. The latest estimate is that about one third of all state-owned enterprises (SOEs) experienced losses in 1994 and the total amount of losses was over 25 per cent higher in 1994 than in 1993. Loss-making SOEs thus constitute a heavy burden on the finances of the central Government, whose deficit is at least partly responsible for generating inflationary pressures in the economy. SOE borrowing from the banking sector, which would have been cut off if banks had truly acted on profitability principles, represents a direct misallocation of financial resources.

Therefore, on grounds of economic efficiency and macroeconomic control, it appears that some state enterprises should be shut down. On the other hand, shutting down loss-making enterprises and streamlining the labour force of others would create mass urban unemployment, which has very high social and political costs, especially in a period of high inflation. Moreover, writing off the debts of these companies, which they are not always servicing, would bankrupt many state banks. These considerations constitute a political obstacle to enterprise reform.

So far, this polic), dilemma has not been satisfactorily resolved. Instead, the Government follows a stop-go strategy regarding enterprise reform. Consequently, there have been very few cases of bankruptcy of state enterprises, and the banking system extends credits to loss-generating SOEs despite the governmental pronouncement that they would become commercial banks once "policy banks" had been established. One result is that the broad measure of the money supply (M2) increased by over 34 per cent in 1994, as opposed to the government target of 24 per cent.

In sum, as long as state enterprises are not reformed so as to heed market forces, and as long as they can receive government subsidies in one form or another, they will not change their behaviour. There will be a lack of rnicroeconomic incentives to respond to monetary or fiscal measures. Unless changes take place in the enterprise sector, state banks will not be able to resolve their problem of bad loans and begin to behave like commercial banks in market economies. Ultimately macroeconomic management will remain ineffective. This is the case for China. It is equally the case for the European transition economies, which are indeed now focusing policy analyses on precisely this problem, as discussed in chapter VI of this Survey.

When the transition from centrally planned to market economies began in eastern Europe and central Asia, it was expected that the adjustment period would require a temporary dip in aggregate economic activity, as the operations of state-owned enterprises changed to reflect new market orientations. It was not expected that the cumulative decline would range from nearly 20 per cent to almost 50 per cent before economic activity began to recover, and then at a relatively slow pace (see table A.3).

As an early part of the transition strategy, Governments freed most prices, releasing long-suppressed inflationary pressures which were then exacerbated by the soaring of budgetary deficits and inflationary credit creation. Macroeconomic stabilization quickly became a major focus of transition policy, however, with varying degrees of success, often due to political pressure for credits and subsidies for the enterprise sector coupled, in some cases, with uncontrollable growth of credit in the form of inter-enterprise arrears. Meanwhile, the supply response that was to he a central result of transition occurred much more slowly than had been anticipated. The macroeconomic performance of the transition economies became the prisoner of microeconomic disappointments. The attention of policy makers in the transition economies was inevitably drawn to the question of enterprise behaviour.

However different the speed and depth of economic reform, one key problem was common to all the countries in transition. In none of them, even in the countries most advanced in their journey to a full-fledged market economy, have economic agents conformed to the model that the policy makers had in mind as their goal when they launched the reforms. The early reformers (as in Hungary) were understandably the first to experience this disappointment, but at that time the behaviour of economic agents could at least in part be explained by the fact that they had to operate in an environment that in essence retained the features of the command economy.

The process of economic transformation changed this environment, in some countries more than in others, but profoundly in each ease. Yet, for the transition to succeed it has to take root at the microeco-nomic level. The general expectation was that enterprises, once permitted to do business as they saw fit, freshly motivated by profit-seeking and impelled by competition, would introduce innovations in their product lines, seek new suppliers that would he a better business fit than those prescribed by the central planning authorities earlier, shed labour to make production more efficient, and aggressively seek new markets. In short, the formerly planned enterprise had to become a "firm". In many cases, however, this has not yet happened.

 () 

N H 1995

THE PATTERN OF TRANSFORMATION AND ITS MICROECONOMIC DIMENSION

Though the term "economies in transition" is routinely applied to all the countries of central and eastern Europe and central Asia that used to have centrally planned economies, the group of these countries is far from homogeneous. Some countries have advanced further towards functioning market systems; others have declared transition to market economy as their goal, but have thus far not initiated the major reforms of transition. But everywhere there is analysis, debate and experimentation about alternative ways of bringing about economic and social transformation.

Transition in the more rapidly reforming countries, though far from smooth, is quite tangible. For example. some transition economies (in particular, Hungary) are seeing the results of transition policies initiated more than two decades ago. At the same time, others, which started barely three years ago, advanced unexpectedly quickly given the burden of decades of bureaucratic planning and control. Thus, the Baltic States have made remarkable progress in many aspects of economic transformation, which places them among the fastest reforming transition economies. Few analysts expected the Russian Federation to lead in economic transformation within the Commonwealth of Independent States, but it happened.

Manifestations of the tempo of economic transformation are ubiquitous, as are, of course, tasks yet to be accomplished. One clear indicator of the radical changes in the transition economies is the growing share of the private sector in all areas of economic activity. This was accomplished in part by the rapid "destatization" of enterprises (in some countries, through mass privatization programmes of different types) and in part by the spontaneous growth of newly established private firms. As a result of this development, the share of output produced by the non-state sector has been growing steadily: in 1994, it is estimated that this share was in the range of 35 to 65 per cent of GDP in the central and eastern European transition economies and the Russian Federation (see table VI.1).

Another important sign of change is the increasing openness of the transition economies in both trade and financial terms. Most of the economies in transition have considerably liberalized and diversified their trade, allowing for a growing import penetration and removing artificial barriers between production for export and production for domestic consumption. Most of these countries have also established unified exchange rates and have introduced "internal convertibility" of their currencies (i.e., limited current-account convertibility) and the faster reformers are moving towards full convertibility. Indeed, in 1994, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania made an important step in this direction by accepting the obligations of Article VIII of the Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund and became the first transition economies to undertake this commitment.

In contrast to the past, the opening up placed domestic producers in a completely different environment, exposing them thoroughly to foreign competition. Despite the existing market distortions, the pressure of international competition became one of the strongest driving forces of enterprise reform, pushing firms to adjust their costs and prices towards competitive levels.

 P F C II V F 8 ON POt IC

Apart from the effect of the opening up to international markets and foreign competition, the internationalization of the transition economies is taking place also through the inflow of foreign capital, both foreign direct investment and portfolio investment. Although the inflow of foreign capital to these countries was below expectations, it has been playing an important role in the transformation process. In fact, owing to the scarcity of local capital, the degree of foreign participation is one of the factors determining the speed of commercial privatization in the transition economies. Foreign direct investment is also an important channel for the transfer of technological and managerial know-how and for enhancing the access of these countries to new markets.

The first steps towards the establishment of capital markets have also been taken, at least in the faster-reforming transition economies. Although still in their embryonic stage, with quite low volumes of trading by international standards, stock exchanges already function in Bratislava, Budapest, Moscow, Prague, Warsaw and some other capital cities of central and eastern Europe. In some cases (most notably the Czech Republic), the stock exchanges have channelled substantial flows of foreign portfolio investment into the transition economies. With further progress in privatization, the stock exchanges will increasingly play the essential role of raising capital for microeconomic restructuring in the transition economies and generating important market signals for economic agents.

Thus, some of the basic market institutions are now essentially in place in the rapidly reforming countries, even if they are not always fully operational. Of course, there is still much to be done before the institutional infrastructure and the regulatory framework in these countries match the standards of developed market economies; however, the progress already made in a relatively short historic period is encouraging.

Governments differ significantly in the design and implementation of economic reforms, and intensive policy debates on many problems of economic transformation continue in all transition economies. In some countries, society and the political system work towards a workable consensus on the modalities of transition and its policy requisites, the role that the State should retain in the reformed economy or the risk of relying on outside financing. In other countries, the policy-making process has not yet crystallized around precisely what should be the concrete path of economic transformation and what strategy should be followed, beyond a general concept of striving for a "market economy".

In this regard, the experience that is building in the making of transition policies, learning which approaches work in the way intended and which do not, will be of widespread usefulness. Recent research in a number of transition economies has opened the door to a deeper perspective on one of the core issues of transition: transforming enterprises.

Reforming corporate governance and control

Each of the former centrally planned economies began the transition process with the same fundamental challenge, namely, to convert its stateowned enterprises (SOEs) into appropriately functioning companies. Several steps were necessary (although not necessarily in a distinct sequence).

 PER SPEC TIV FS ON

One of the first steps was "commercialization": SOEs were granted formal autonomy and independence, as well as all the responsibilities for surviving in a transitional environment on their own. As part of this process, mainly in eastern Europe, many but by no means all of the large, often vertically integrated and monopolistic enterprises were broken up into separate, smaller units, especially in Czechoslovakia in 1990-1991 and in Bulgaria in 1991-1992.1

Another related part of the reform was to change the legal status of the SOEs, a process called the "corporatization" of the state-owned sector, which is still under way in some countries. Many former centrally planned economies embarked on the transition with state ownership of enterprises somewhat imprecisely defined, which led to a vacuum of control over the SOEs after the mechanisms of the command economy were abolished. For example, the system of internal control of enterprises that applied especially in Poland, but also in Czechoslovakia and Hungary, entailed the active involvement of the employees in the management of their company. Thus, the so-called "workers' councils" in Poland approved or took many important internal decisions, including hiring and firing of the management and setting their wages. In these cases, the Government (formally or informally) had little say in enterprise management and there were no other external authorities. Corporatization would change this.

The next task for Governments was thus to make ownership rights over the SOEs transparent. On a legal basis, this was accomplished by incorporating them, that is, by transforming the SOEs into joint stock companies or limited liability companies, initially 100 per cent owned by the State. By early 1995, the process of corporatization had almost been completed in Bulgaria, the Czech Republic. Hungary, Romania and Slovakia and was well advanced in Poland, although a large number of non-corporatized SOEs still remained in that country.

Corporatization entailed the establishment of explicit oversight bodies of the transformed SOEs which was a further step in the deepening of corporate reform. In some countries, oversight powers were delegated to existing institutions by restructuring and rearranging their function. For example, in Bulgaria, those powers remained in the supervising ministries. In the breakup of the Soviet Union in 1992, the all-union ministries and their plants in the Russian Federation were transformed into "combines" or "concerns" that held the enterprises in essence in the form of corporate trusts or holding companies. In other countries, new institutions were created for the purpose of enterprise supervision and governance. Thus, in Hungary, there are two such bodies: the State Holding Company, controlling SOEs that are not expected to be privatized in the short run, and the State Property Agency, controlling all other SOEs; in the Czech Republic, the controlling functions are divided among three bodies the supervising ministries, the Ministry of Privatization and the newly established Fund of National Property. In Poland, the commercialized SOEs are formally owned (and hence governed) by the Treasury; in addition, another government body was established the Industrial Development Agency with the goal of assisting the process of enterprise restructuring before privatization. In Romania, three institutions were empowered to implement enterprise restructuring: the Restructuring Agency, the State Ownership Fund and the supervising ministries.

For example, before 1989, the average Czech manufacturing enterprise consisted of eight to nine plants that were usually vertically integrated By 1992, the average number of plants per enterprise dropped to one to two (see Economic Commission for Europe, Economic Survey of Europe in 1993-1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No E.94.111.1), p. 167),

 Once commercialized, corporatized and with a formal line of state responsibility, it was still necessary to establish new management boards for each enterprise, nominated by the legally authorized state institution, to supervise major decisions of the enterprise (although decisions on what to produce, how to produce it, from whom to buy and to whom to sell were the responsibility of enterprise management). In those state firms in which workers had earlier participated directly in management, this role was greatly cireumseribed.2

As countries adopted different privatization strategies, different styles of corporate governance followed; indeed, as management and workers in the SOEs had a direct interest in the outcome of privatization, they often sought to shape it to their advantage. Management or employee buy-outs of the firm are obvious examples where "insiders" control the privatization. Insiders also generally took an active role in "strategic commercial sales", that is, sale of a controlling interest in the enterprise, usually to a foreign investor. In this case, the insiders offer their support for the project, knowledge about the enterprise and influence over enterprise matters in exchange for certain commitments by the investor (e.g., on lay-offs and investment). In any event, this type of privatization usually resulted in the quick assimilation of the privatized company into the model of corporate control of the strategic investor.

In contrast, all types of privatization that did not involve strategic investors resulted in dispersed ownership at least initially and as a consequence generally weak shareholder control over the company, effectively strengthening the power of the firm's management. The one important novelty was the "mass privatization schemes", such as those in Czechoslovakia (later in the Czech Republic and in Slovakia) and the Russian Federation. The "voucher privatization" in Czechoslovakia was the prototype. It provided practically free distribution of vouchers that could be exchanged for equity shares.

Somewhat unexpectedly, however, the voucher scheme led to a significant concentration of ownership of the privatized enterprises. That is, investment privatization funds appeared that offered people shares in the fund in exchange for their vouchers and then used the vouchers to purchase substantial ownership shares of the companies being privatized.3 As most of the large funds had been controlled by commercial banks some of these banks were also privatized during the first two waves of voucher privatization the banks indirectly became influential shareholders of the enterprises. So, despite the intention of establishing an ownership and control structure based on the Anglo-Saxon model of stock-market dominance of corporate governance, the voucher-privatization scheme resulted in a corporate governance structure rather similar to the German model!'

In the Russian Federation, by the end of 1994 more than 60 per cent of enterprises were no longer state-owned and more than 40 million people had become shareholders. But in this case, the privatization process led to a preponderance of insider-controlled enterprises. During the first (voucher) stage of privatization, the large majority of enterprises chose the option whereby the majority of shares were distributed among the employees, with a large stake also given to management. By late 1993, two thirds of the privatized industrial enterprises were formally controlled by management and employees. Once this stage was accomplished, managers tended to gradually buy out the shares from the employees, thereby ensuring firm control without effective supervision by an outside board of directors.s

RSPECTIVES 0N

Insider influence in privatization has, in fact, been quite general. In the cases of strategic sales in Poland, for example, employees of corporatized SOEs had the right to participate in choosing strategic investors; there is also evidence that the ownership structure of some to-be-privatized firms was designed in a way to preserve insider control. Besides, insiders of Polish enterprises had a say in the timing of the privatization itself, enforcing schedules they considered most favourable for them.' In the first wave of voucher privatization in the Czech Republic, about 75 per cent of the privatization projects approved were those submitted by the enterprise managers.?

The very act of announcing a privatization programme and the plans for its implementation appears to provoke all actors to react in defence of their interests. Thus the announcement of lists of enterprises to be included in mass privatization schemes in Poland, Bulgaria (though not yet implemented as of early 1995) and the Russian Federation aroused an active response in the form of numerous proposals for alternative privatization schemes. Most of these were cases where enterprise managers or employees could see possibilities for extracting higher benefits for themselves by applying alternative methods of privatizing "their" enterprise.

The motivations of managers and employees in the pre-privatization phase may translate into changes in enterprise performance. If the SOE is to be sold to a strategic investor, then managers may be motivated to restructure first in order to prove their skill at running a successful business. On the other hand, if the enterprise is privatized via a management or management-employee buyout, then the management may be motivated to delay restructuring (or even show worse performance) in order to reduce the selling price./

Privatization per se does not solve the problem of corporate governance and managerial motivation, especially in schemes resulting in dispersed ownership or insider control. In this case, "perverse" managerial behaviour may persist into the post-privatization phase. Much depends on the environment in which management operates.

"Hard" or "soft" management?

Whether state or privately owned, managers make decisions according to the world they confront. Under central planning, a state enterprise was not expected to be fully responsible for its financial autonomy. In case of financial problems, the State always stood behind to rescue the enterprise, a reality that has commonly been depicted by the phrase "soft budget constraint". In a private enterprise at least in the stylized theoretical showcase management closely monitors the financial flows related to its activities and alters those activities so as to "maximize" profits.

Hardening of the enterprise budget constraint was thus a central requirement of the transition from planned to private enterprise. The essence of the policy of hard budget constraints is the commitment of the authorities to clear and transparent ex-ante rules and restrictions on the access of enterprises to financial resources different from those generated by their own business activity. Indeed, discontinuation of budget subsidies, combined with monetary and fiscal austerity, was aimed at forcing enterprises to be more responsive to demand pressures and to increase their internal efficiency.

The threat of liquidation, one consequence of properly functioning bankruptcy legislation, is also an element of the policy of hard budget constraints. All central and eastern European transition economies have now introduced (or reinstituted) bankruptcy legislation. However, the latter has not yet had wide application as an enterprise restructuring tool, at least regarding SOEs. Strict application of the bankruptcy codes would have run roughshod over diverse and complicated cases, many involving large-scale enterprises, thereby worsening social pressures that were already aggravated by the transition process.' In addition, it might also end up destroying units that could be viable in the long run.

In this regard, much was learned from Hungary's experiment in 1992, when it introduced bankruptcy legislation with an "automatic trigger" that forced enterprise managers to file for bankruptcy within 90 days after failing to honour any pending obligation under the threat of criminal suit. The result was a flood of bankruptcy procedures, over 4,000 in 1992 alone, mostly involving small enterprises, that clogged the courts.", Without the requisite economic, legal and institutional structures to process such a caseload, the "automatic trigger" was abolished after less than two years.

After bankruptcy is declared, one end-point is the dismantling of the assets of the enterprise. Another is the financial restructuring of troubled firms. However, it is a costly operation and, unless the goals are clear and are shared by all participants and the rules are transparent and enforceable, it may not lead to the expected results either.

Recently, the Governments of a number of transition economies engaged, somewhat reluctantly, in massive financial restructuring-and-rescue operations for SOEs and state-owned commercial banks. These moves were provoked by the rapidly accumulating losses in many SOEs, the snowballing of uncol-lectible inter-enterprise debt and bank loans, and the resulting crisis in the banking sector. Again, countries followed different approaches but all involved different forms of bail-out using public financial resources.

Hungary has had the most experience with financial rescue operations. It undertook a large-scale rescue operation of commercial banks in two steps in 1992-1994. In the first, it swapped government bonds for bad debt and in the second it recapitalized eight state-owned banks. In addition, 14 industrial firms and 159 Hungarian agricultural cooperatives in financial difficulties were selected by the Ministry of Finance for special treatment in 1993. Assistance included the cancellation, rescheduling or swapping of outstanding debt, underwriting by the State of large credits, allocation of large funds from privatization proceeds for reorganization, and cancellation of large outstanding customs duties and taxes.ii

Bulgaria followed a similar approach, although it was implemented in one step in 1994. In that move, all non-performing bank loans to enterprises that had originated before 1991 were removed from the banks' balance sheets in exchange for long-term government bonds; then, the principal of those debts was written off the enterprise balance sheets.r2

In the Czech Republic, a new financial institution a "hospital" bank was created for the purpose of financial restructuring. It purchased at a discount a substantial amount of old substandard loans from the other commercial banks. The Czech Government also implemented a number of financial rescue operations such as cleaning up old debts of to-be-privatized SOEs (1991), recapitalizing commercial banks (1991) and bolstering the capital of commercial banks (1992). These policy actions were implemented by the Fund of National Property using resources accumulated from the privatization of SOEs.n

The Polish approach to financial restructuring has been the least "interventionist" as it involved the State in only one step, the initial recapitalization of the banks. After that, banks were obliged to clean up the substandard loans from their asset portfolios by forcing financial restructuring of the indebted enterprises. The banks were given four options: persuade the debtor to start servicing the debt, initiate bankruptcy or liquidation procedures, sign a conciliation agreement, or sell the questionable loan on a secondary market.14

It must be stressed, however, that these rescue operations do not solve the fundamental problems of physical and economic restructuring of the enterprises in the transition economies: the enterprises need to renovate their obsolete physical assets, modernize their production technologies, upgrade their management and become capable of producing marketable products. Ultimately, the disruption of restructuring cannot be avoided and it is clear that not all enterprises will survive the process. This will be a long-term operation and in any case it will require substantial resources; however, it must be based on clear goals and transparent policy for its implementation.

OWNERSHIP AND EFFICIENCY: HOW ENTERPRISES BEHAVE

As noted at the outset, the aggregate supply response and the inflation-promoting pressure for financing under transition have been disappointing. But recent surveys and case-studies now provide some ability to differentiate behaviour among enterprises. A quick summary of that work would be that there is some evidence of positive adjustment and improved performance of both SOEs and privatized companies in many central and eastern European transition economies; at the same time, there are numerous negative examples as wells The studies suggest that most state and privatized enterprises have adjusted in only a partial way, although there are also certain instances of pronounced passive behaviour wherein firms take no action towards adjustment and change. And although industry and regional differences have been significant in explaining firm behaviour, particularly as regards output and wages,u firm-level factors appear to be the most discriminating determinants and ownership status has the strongest bearing, at least in eastern Europe.

A recent study of Polish enterprise performance, for example, revealed some striking differences among four categories of firms: traditional SOEs, corporatized SOEs, privatized companies and newly established private firms.ii Thus, new private firms in Poland display high tax discipline and good cash management with respect to both their payables and their receivables; privatized firms fair quite well in these terms, but notably worse than the new private companies; SOEs show the worst performance, with some of them having accumulated huge amounts of inter-enterprise and tax arrears. Also, private firms in Poland grow faster, create more jobs and hire larger numbers of new employees, invest more and are more profitable than SOEs. At the same time, the study revealed that in many aspects of their behaviour, privatized firms more often resemble SOEs than newly formed private enterprises.

In other countries, however, the significance of ownership status as a determinant of enterprise behaviour has been smaller. It was lowest in the Czech Republic among the central European countries studied, where voucher privatization was implemented on a large scale, resulting in quite dispersed ownership and less intensive external corporate governance.n Such results lend credence to the proposition that hard budget constraints and exit mechanisms (e.g., bankruptcy) perform more efficiently when clear ownership relations and corporate governance are in place.

The experience of the Russian Federation adds a further dimension to the comparison. There, the destatization of enterprises has taken place in the absence of stable, transparent and enforceable property rights or of contract enforcement mechanisms, securities supervision and the like. This created an opportunity for managers to "privatize the rewards and socialize the costs" of their businesses; and in the conditions of macroeconomic unpredictability and general instability, their business goals could hardly be anything but short term. Thus, survey data show almost no difference in behaviour between new private firms and destatized enterprises.19 The former are considered to be more flexible and innovative as far as production programmes and markets are concerned, and they accept responsibility for social services only if it advances their business interests. But they, too, are primarily concerned with short-term objectives, if not mere survival, so strategic corporate planning and long-run investment in most cases do not have high priority.

Firm-level studies of a number of transition economies have also identified a phenomenon that has come to be called the "financial black hole".n The essence is that a significant portion of the financial problems of the enterprise sector tends to be concentrated in a relatively small group of large, financially troubled SOEs. These enterprises are typically chronic loss makers and have accumulated considerable amounts of bad debt. And while many of them could be considered technically insolvent, they continue to operate as going concerns.

Financial black holes have been discerned in studies of Bulgaria, Hungary, Poland and Romania. A comprehensive study of large and medium-sized Polish enterprises, for example, revealed that in 1992-1993 about 90 per cent of enterprises were practically debt-free, whereas the remaining 10 per cent of enterprises accumulated large debts to banks, as well as inter-enterprise and tax arrears. The subgroup of the most financially troubled enterprises, comprising 14 per cent of all enterprises included in the study, contributed 11 per cent of all revenues, but was responsible for 62 per cent of all credits and loans.n

A study employing the same methodology and covering all medium and large non-financial enterprises in Hungary (about 5,000 firms) unveiled a similar, though not so acute, situation. The group of the most financially troubled firms, accounting for 10 per cent of revenues in 1992, held 38 per cent of the total end-year bank debt. Another enterprise survey in Hungary, conducted by the Ministry of Finance, revealed that 68 per cent of the losses of large and medium-sized enterprises were concentrated in a relatively small group of 603 large enterprises which, at the same time, held 37 per cent of all bank loans extended to enterprises in 1992. Within this group, there was a subgroup of 41 very large enterprises, each of which had losses exceeding 1 billion forints.n

 SPEC TIV ES 0N P01 ICIES

In addition, a study of 1,766 manufacturing enterprises in Bulgaria found that, in 1992, 10 per cent of the enterprises held 62 per cent of all the longterm bank credit to this group and were responsible for 43 per cent of the losses. n In Romania, it is reported that about 100 large enterprises account for almost 50 per cent of all arrears to the banking system.24 The situation is somewhat different in the Czech Republic, where no concentration of financially troubled enterprises has been identified among the large SOEs.25

The formation of such financial black holes creates very serious problems for the transition economies. Most of these enterprises are industrial giants, initially designed for regional market integration, currently equipped with obsolete physical assets and heavily overstaffed. They are usually concentrated in mining, in heavy industrial branches or in industries in which a country was "specialized" within the regional integration scheme.n Most of these enterprises are genuinely unviable in a market environment and most probably have no future.

However, unlike small loss makers, whose liquidation does not pose serious economic and social problems, the closure of big loss-making enterprises is politically very difficult. Aside from the political pressure that the management of such firms can bring to bear, politicians are reluctant to face the social consequences of closing them, especially when such enterprises are the major employers in their region. At the same time, their continuing existence leads to the snowballing of huge losses, which are a burden for the whole society.

The issue is not, however, corporate size per se. In the Russian Federation, many industrial giants have been successfully privatized. However, they appear to continue to hoard labour even as privatized enterprises and many retain the financially burdensome social infrastructure of the state-enterprise era (childcare facilities, hospitals, recreation etc). Here it appears that, unlike the social and political concerns of the Government or the Parliament, the directors of privatized enterprises in the Russian Federation have strong financial motives for their actions. Although they might also fear strikes and unrest, there are tax consequences that make labour hoarding less expensive than firing workers. Similarly, the new owners appear not to hesitate to sell social service facilities when they can find buyers, which is almost never in the case of the facilities in "company towns".

Research also seems to suggest that there may be traditions or at least a continuity of entrepreneurship in the transition economies. A recent study based on panel data on Czechoslovak (later Czech and Slovak) and Polish enterprises detected that currently viable enterprises in most cases also have a record of good pre-reform performance in terms of growth, exports, profitability etc.n Such enterprises were typically more responsive to change and adjusted relatively better than did less profitable firms, in spite of the fact that their superior financial position could have allowed them to cushion themselves against hard budget constraints for a longer period of time.

Entrepreneurial distortions

In seeking to understand how to bolster the amount of dynamic behaviour in enterprises in transition economies, it is natural to look back over managerial behaviour thus far in the transition period. Certainly, the enterprises in transition economies have operated in "imperfect" markets that have been rife with monopoly, poor information and infrastructure, without adequate access to Financing and in some cases with powerful labour movements. Specific transit ional market imperfections are a serious obstacle to the process of enterprise adjustment and restructuring in these countries. But the key to understanding the disappointing microeconomic performance in the transition economies, eems to reside in the first place in the entrepreneurial distortions put before enterprise management.

Viewing the enterprises as complex social organizations, one's focus is quickly drawn to the pushes and pulls on the managers. As already noted, at the start of the transformation, the transitional shocks created a power vacuum in SOEs. On the one hand, enterprises and their managers found themselves in an unprecedentedly harsh situation of macroeconomic austerity and vanishing markets and, on the other, a loosening (or altogether lacking) governance.

Even though later policy makers undertook to overcome this situation, proper corporate governance of SOEs and some privatized companies (especially those resulting from mass privatization) is not yet in place even at the current stage of the transformation process. Governments themselves rarely engage in elose control over enterprises that they formally own; nor are they perceived as having direct control or authority over enterprise decision-making, according to survey data.a

The governance criteria of the bodies that formally hold the property rights to the new firms have tended to be ambiguous and sometimes heavily influenced by private or institutional interests. It is thus not surprising that the strongest managerial motive, certainly at the start of the transition, seems to have been survival: retaining the managerial position in an enterprise that survives as a going concern. The goals of market-oriented adjustment and restructuring, at best, came in second place among the priorities of managers, and only if they were considered a prerequisite for survival.

Another factor affecting managerial incentives, at least in eastern and central Europe, has been workers' power. To the degree that managers depended on the formal or informal decision-making power of their workers, they were prone to seek strategies that did not provoke a dangerous feedback from them. The emergence of a stagnant pool of long-term unemployed workers, not to mention the high cost of job loss, promoted active resistance of workers' unions against layoffs. The problems related to this type of situation were likely to confront countries with relatively strong workers' movements such as Poland, but there is also evidence of similar symptoms in other transition economies.a

Together, these factors made managers more risk-averse and discouraged them from undertaking radical measures for enterprise adjustment. The generation of liquidity necessary to maintain the enterprise as a going concern became instead one of the highest priorities. Enterprise restructuring measures that would raise the value of the enterprise in the future, but not generate cash in the short run, had low priority. Not surprisingly, micro-data indicate that restructuring efforts, if undertaken by the managers of SOEs, were as a rule actions that were not threatening to the insiders and were not cash demanding.n

The one major potential exception was if the reforms entailed higher potential for personal gains for the managers. Since the threat of enterprise extinction always existed for managers in the uncertain and highly risky environment was another strong factor in their behaviour. Rent seeking could take a variety of forms but one of the most common has been the establishment by enterprise managers of parallel private firms.

To avoid legal difficulties, managers could do this through arrangements with other persons who are trusted by the managers. By contracting out some of the firm's supplies or sales and manipulating price differentials, a portion of the enterprise's income could be channelled to the private firm or firms controlled by the managers. In another scheme, the enterprise would transfer productive assets to private enterprises by leasing or by contributing them to joint ventures.31 This could strip away significant parts of the enterprise's assets and, in loss-making SOEs, turn a difficult situation into an impossible one.

Such activity could even keep an unviable enterprise afloat. For example, an unviable state enterprise might lease one of its assets, say an office building, to a private firm. The revenue from the lease might generate enough cash flow to make it possible for the SOE to survive. Alternatively, the State could close the SOE and sell or lease the building itself, keeping the revenues in the public domain.

A further pull on managers away from the desired venues of entrepreneurial behaviour lay in the "hard" budget policies. That is, although most of the traditional "soft" budget constraints of central planning were eliminated, managers became very ingenious at evading the new hard-budget constraints by simply not paying bills, as the legal and regulatory bodies lacked the means for enforcing the rules against such behaviour. Indeed, in the Russian Federation, intentional non-payment became the preferred method of financing even for relatively liquid firms.

Moreover, the prolonged pursuit of macroeconomic austerity repeatedly prompted the political need for enterprise rescue operations. What economists call the "moral hazard" of such operations tolerating repetitions of a risky behaviour by saving economic agents from the consequences of undertaking it seemed applicable and eroded the credibility of economic po1icy.32

Indeed, in analysing the attitude of managers towards their new budget constraints, it was found that some of the constraints were considered "harder" than others. In a survey of Polish enterprises, when asked to rank their payment obligations in the order they were paid, both private firms and SOEs as a whole ranked taxes and wages first and second, whereas payments to suppliers and banks were ranked last. The situation was distinctly different only in financially distressed SOEs, which ranked wages first, with all other obligations far behind. The SOEs financed almost half of their losses by increases in tax and social security arrears. Other studies found similar results, indicating that although Polish enterprise behaviour is extremely differentiated, relations wit the State have been the main factor softening budget constraints, particularly of SOEs.33

The situation of financially distressed firms in Hungary appears to resemble that in Poland. An analysis of the dynamics and of the structure of enterprise arrears in Hungary revealed that, among the surveyed firms, over half of the arrears constituted tax and social security payables. There was less evidence of deteriorating inter-enterprise payments.34

The payment priorities of Czech and Bulgarian enterprises appear to have been quite different. An analysis of the structure of enterprise indebtedness in the Czech Republic has shown that most of the enterprise arrears comprised overdue payments to suppliers, rather than to banks or other creditors. On the other hand, in Bulgaria, the overdue service of bank credit constituted the overwhelming majority of enterprise arrears,.

In all these countries, as in all likelihood in the other transition economies where comparable survey research is not currently available, specific aspects of the legal and economic environment shape how managers cope with their "hard" budget inconsistencies. Managers. in effect, select their coping strategy based on the opportunity costs of various options, including the size and probability of penalties, and, obviously, these differ from country to country.

In this regard, one of the important determinants is the strength or rather, weakness of contractual agreements. Although initially concentrated in the SOEs, the moral-hazard consequences of not fulfilling contracts has started to contaminate the newly emerging private enterprises. Violation of contracts, delays or cancellation of deliveries and deferred or rejected payments are thus by no means exclusive characteristics of SOEs. Commercial banks, for example, are accumulating new bad loans owed by new private firms. When faced with financial problems, private businesses and foreign companies operating in transition economies have also started to queue for state support or tried to obtain government preferences.36

Learning from the policy experience

With the benefit of hindsight, certain assumptions about the causal relations of microeconomic adjustment now seem to have been inaccurate. One such assumption was that enterprises had to be placed in an environment that would force adjustment and restructuring in order to become viable and efficient; that is, restructuring was considered the medium for attaining viability and efficiency. In reality, the causal relation likely worked in the opposite direction: it is mostly those enterprises that were already viable that restructured and adjusted successfully.

Not all SOEs whose accounts showed them to have been profitable in the past turned out to be profitable under market conditions; however, most of the firms that are profitable now also performed well in the past.r Them is almost no evidence, however, of the reverse happening: an unprofitable enterprise becoming profitable and efficient after the transformation. Of course, all quantitative measures of pre-transition "efficiency" or "inefficiency" need to be interpreted rather cautiously owing to the highly distorted price structure at that time. However, it is clear that at least past "inefficiency" was not only due to distorted prices; it also reflected basic underperformance.3

All this, as well as the diverging patterns of enterprise performance in the transition economies, seems to mirror the heterogeneity of the SOEs at the start of the transition (partly reflected in their performance indicators): some of them were equipped with better technologies than others; some enterprises had already been exposed to foreign markets and competition, others had not; and managerial skills differed across the enterprise sector.

In sum, the experience of microeconomic adjustment in the economies in transition has revealed some striking features of enterprise behaviour and performance in this period. Not all of them were anticipated by policy makers in these countries, which created extra difficulties in the process of economic transformation. Indeed, the environment in which firms are supposed to adjust still has many shortcomings. All markets in the transition economies are still in their embryonic stage and are impaired by severe distortions and imperfections. Deficient information and malfunctioning information channels engender segmented markets and some policy measures impede competitive pressures. Undesirable, if explainable, enterprise behaviour is still widespread. In any event, the actual in many instances, painful experience of transition provided new insights and better understanding of the patterns of enterprise adjustment in this turbulent period.

One of the policy lessons of the first phase of economic transformation is thus that transitional markets require clear and enforceable regulatory norms and well-designed motivational mechanisms for their implementation. Activist policies have to be very carefully designed in order to avoid "moral hazard". It is also important that privatization policies lead to proper corporate governance structures which are the basic requirement for market-conforming restructuring and adjustment.

The big loss-making SOEs constitute one of the most acute microeconomic problems of the transition economies. Privatization cannot be a solution for all of them as some are simply "unprivatizable". However, postponing the day of reckoning tends to aggravate the negative effects of the loss-making giants. If possible at all, the restructuring of such enterprises requires a closer involvement of the authorities; but in the end, many of them will have to be liquidated.

Enhancing the development of a competitive market environment is another requirement for successful enterprise restructuring. In this regard, the further opening up of transition economies to the international economy can have an important role in fostering competition and breeding larger numbers of entrepreneurs. On the other hand, it needs to be remembered that virtually all market-economy countries including the most advanced and the fastest growing have economic and political reasons to depart from a complete laissez-faire policy.

The new phase of the transformation process will pose new challenges to policy makers in the transition economies. Careful attention to both macroand microeconomic policy issues will be needed in order to speed up the reform process, maintain macroeconomic stability and embark on a path of sustainable growth. As elsewhere, however, policy-making will still be a case of "learning by doing", with a premium on recognizing when policy adjustments are needed and having the flexibility to take timely corrective action.

In the preceding three chapters, the effort was made to characterize important aspects of policy-making in three analytically distinct groups of countries. In each case, policy-making was seen to be somewhat different than it had been several years earlier and one could identify loci of innovation within each group of countries. The policies discussed were all domestic, albeit within a context of economies that are increasingly open to international trade and financial flows. However, policy has also been evolving in the realm of international economic cooperation. The present chapter looks at a selection of international arrangements among Governments in the trade and financial arenas that wholly or in part aim to promote economic development. That is to say, this chapter looks at the results for developing countries of the Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations that were held under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) from 1986 to 1993, and at the provision of official finance for development by the industrialized countries in recent years.

The picture that emerges from these cases is one of fundamental change, whereby the developing countries for the most part, excluding the least developed among them are seeking to be and are being treated differently than in the past. This may he attributed in part to changes in the pressures on Governments in both groups of countries those arising from their own private sectors and from changing political priorities in a post cold-war world as well as from the give and take of international negotiations. At this point, however, these are only speculations because the changes identified seem to be part of a broader process of policy change globally. In other words, we seem to he in the midst of a turning-point as regards the nature of international cooperation and turning-points are analysed most clearly long after they have been passed. The ambition of the present chapter is the more limited one of identifying and characterizing the changes that are taking place.

For the policy cases at hand, the core of the changes seems to reside in a more confident approach by the policy makers in developing countries and the new image that people in the developed economies have of the developing countries. As now seen by many voters in developed economies, the stereotypical developing country is either a low-wage competitor that produces increasingly sophisticated products or an entity that is mired in poverty, social dissolution and political decay. As is the case with any stereotype, both of these are exaggerations, but neither one prompts votes in industrialized countries for continued or deepened special arrangements, other than those involving assistance of a humanitarian nature. Indeed, as this chapter documents, the special trade arrangements and financial flows offered by many developed-country Governments have weakened. By the same token, many developing-country Governments have more actively joined in international negotiations and sought alternative trade and financial arrangements to replace dependency on less assured special treatments.

TRADE POLICY FOR DEVELOPMENT AFTER THE URUGUAY ROUND OF MULTILATERAL TRADE NEGOTIATIONS

Trade policy for development encompasses many act ivities, but one of the central concerns has been the terms of access of developing-country exports to the markets of the industrialized countries. The international rules of access have been governed by the GNIT and are now being governed by its successor, the World Trade Organization and thus evidence of a new approach to international cooperation for development should be visible in the results of the Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations.

The several rounds of multilateral trade negotiations since the end of the Second World War have focused essentially on two goals: first, each participant sought to gain greater access to foreign markets in exchange for allowing more foreign access to its domestic market; second, each sought to establish favourable rules of the game for trade relations and dispute-settlement procedures. Before the Uruguay Round, developing countries for the most part had not actively participated in the give and take of multilateral trade negotiations.

Industrialized countries had acknowledged that developing countries were at a disadvantage vis-a-vis developed countries, particularly in terms of competing in sectors where comparative advantage could be acquired as a product of learning-by-doing, economies of scale, and positive externalities associated with the establishment of modern manufacturing and service activities.' Developing countries were thus accorded "special and differential treatment" in the GATT agreement itself, as well as in the various negotiating rounds.

As it evolved, differential treatment followed two distinct tracks. On the one hand, developing countries were largely exempted from most of the disciplines that applied to developed countries. For example, "tariff bindings", which are commitments in tariff negotiations of ceiling or actual tariff levels, were not required of developing countries. In addition, they were given flexibility to impose temporary quantitative restrictions for balance-of-payments purposes (article XVIII.B) of the GAT1;7 and perhaps most importantly, there was a recognition that subsidies were an acceptable tool of development policy.

The second track, which had been incorporated as part IV of the GATT in 1965, made an explicit conunitment to preferential access and formally waived the obligation of developing countries to make reciprocal concessions in trade negotiations. Preferential access was subsequently put into practice through the various schemes of the Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) instituted by the developed countries. It has often been argued that, while according a measure of benefits, these schemes have not lived up to expectations, mainly owing to their limited product coverage, their non-contractual character (preferences can be withdrawn unilaterally by grantors), the exclusion and "graduation" of beneficiaries at the discretion of the grantor, and the existence of tariff quotas and other limitations within the system!

The Tokyo Round of multilateral trade negotiations in the 1970s was a culminating point in the consensus in favour of special and differential treatment of developing countries. The so-called Enabling Clause provided a permanent legal basis for the GSP, but did not make it obligatory. The codification of differential treatment resulted in the explicit introduction of the concept of graduation into the Enabling Clause, stating that such treatment should be available only according to need and for a limited time period. The problem with the Enabling Clause was that it failed to spell out criteria both for classifying a country as developing and, by implication, for graduation. In practice, industrialized countries have graduated developing countries unilaterally from GSP eligibility. In any event, the value of GSP benefits has been weakened under the Uruguay Round. as the non-preferential tariffs themselves were lowered.

Dilution of special and differential treatment

In negotiations under the Uruguay Round and in negotiations of the terms of accession to the GATT for countries that had not previously been members, developing countries lost a considerable part of their differential treatment, although differential treatment of least developed countries was largely protected (see table VII.1 for details).

A first loss partly the price of entering the negotiating arena was the binding of tariff levels. However, bound tariffs have been set at levels that are substantially above those of currently applied tariffs and they thus accord a measure of policy flexibility to the affected countries. Bound tariff rates for developing countries are mostly in the range of 25-35 per cent. This means that bound tariffs will continue to be, on average, substantially higher than in developed countries! In this regard, some degree of differential treatment survives in the tariff field; and the freedom to raise tariffs up to the bound level may come to be useful in terms of avoiding the need to pay compensation when balance-of-payments problems surface!

Developing countries also lost flexibility in using trade policy measures for addressing balance-of-payments difficulties; that is to say, they have committed themselves to giving preference to "price-based measures" over quantitative restrictions. Moreover, their ability to use quantitative restrictions for balanceof-payments reasons will be severely curtailed by the stringent procedures that surround their imposition and by the possibility that affected parties might invoke the dispute-settlement machinery. Indeed, developing countries have been given less freedom than developed countries in the application of quantitative restrictions, as they are still permitted in sectors and issues of interest to the latter, such as agriculture, textiles and safeguard actions.

Instead of providing special treatment for developing countries, the agreement on subsidies inherently favours developed countries over developing ones. It allows subsidies for basic research and development, labour retraining and environmental adaptation (used more by developed than by developing countries) but prohibits aid for product development (more appropriate to the stage of development and needs of developing countries). More fundamentally, it eliminates the acceptability of subsidies as a tool of economic development programmes, which had been included in the Tokyo Round Code. Exemption from the subsidies agreement exists for lower-income countries, but the graduation point is quite low: all countries with a per capita gross national product (GNP) above $1,000 spelt out in annex VII of the subsidies agreement will have to abide essentially by the same disciplines in this field. Besides the least developed countries, there are only 20 countries with a per capita GNP below $1,000: 10 in Africa, 5 in America and 5 in Asia. The very low per capita income dividing line adopted in the subsidies agreement effectively graduates countries in which export incentives might continue to play a useful role. This group includes countries classified by the World Bank as lower middle income and where significant industrialization has not occurred (for example, the Congo, Jamaica, Jordan, Paraguay).

The agreement on trade-related aspects of intellectual property rights (TRIPs) is particularly stringent with regard to differential treatment. After a grace period of five years (ten years for the least developed), those developing countries that have not yet done so will have to align their intellectual property legislation with that prevailing in the developed countries. Essentially, this involves the extension of patentability to virtually all fields of technology recognized in developed countries and the granting of patent protection for 20 years and of copyright protection for 50 years. This will limit some important forms of technology absorption by developing countries (for example, reverse engineering).

Gains in market access

Even with preferential access weakened, developing countries expected to gain from participating in the GATT round through enhanced market access for their exports. One element of the structural adjustment programmes that many developing countries had undertaken in the 1980s included a liberalization of their import regimes. These were unilateral measures and it was widely felt that participation in the Uruguay Round would help turn an import liberalization strategy into export promotion. Developing countries thus participated actively in the Round, making tariff-reduction offers and record tariff bindings. The end result was a measure of success in reducing barriers to their exports, albeit (as in any negotiation) by less than had been sought('

Although tariffs on products of interest to developing countries were reduced, they will remain at higher levels than those applied to products traded mainly among developed countries. Also, the Round will bring about only marginal improvements in market access in the crucial areas of agriculture and textiles. In spite of the setting up of a new instrument to liberalize trade in services, actual commitments in services of particular interest to developing countries, such as involve the movement of labour, were very few and did not deal with the kinds of temporary migrant labour of greatest interest to developing countries.

Improved market access will also depend on the abolition of "grey area" measures (namely, selective restraints, usually bilateral and against the spirit of the GATT), their replacement by transparent and clearly temporary "safeguard" provisions under multilateral rules, and the disciplining of anti-dumping practices. The safeguard mechanism temporarily allows because of an unforeseen and serious injury to domestic producers caused by imports trade restrictions that are otherwise prohibited. As a result of the Uruguay Round, safeguards are due to replace grey area measures such as "voluntary" export restraints. However, the agreement legitimizes quantitative restrictions directed at individual exporters, albeit with fairly stringent limitations as to duration and proof-of-injury procedures. On the other hand, the anti-dumping agreement whereby importers can take restrictive action because of "unfair" and injurious competition by an exporter can be considered the major loophole of the Final Act and might well allow a recrudescence of protectionism in both developed and by imitation developing countries.

Tariff reductions

As in other GATT rounds, agreed reductions in bound tariffs were an important aspect of the Uruguay Round. All tariff reductions are to be implemented over a five-year period. Once the concessions are implemented, duty-free access by developing countries will increase from 12 to 37 per cent of the value of imports into the United States of America, from 24 to 36 per cent of imports into the European Union (EU) and from 25 to 48 per cent of Japanese imports.? There was also some progress in reducing tariff escalation by degree of processing however, it remains important in product groups such as leather, tobacco, coffee, tea, cocoa, and tropical fruits.'

En developed countries, however, tariff reductions for industrial goods average 38 per cent for imports from all origins, but only 34 per cent for imports from developing countries.' This is due to the fact that the tariff cuts on products of export interest to developing countries are considerably more modest (averaging around 20 per cent ad valorem) than those applying to products traded among industrial countries (which range from 43 to 62 per cent). Moreover, as table VII.2 shows, tariff rates in the four major developed-country markets after the agreed tariff reductions are implemented will still be considerably above the average for all products in such groups as tropical and nontropical agricultural goods, textiles and clothing, and leather and footwear.

Agriculture

For the first time in the history of the GATT, agriculture is included within the framework of international trade disciplines. This is in itself a major breakthrough. However, the substantive improvements in market access for developing-country exporters of temperate foodstuffs are small. There are two reasons. In the first place, the liberalizations and reductions of subsidies actually agreed upon were not large. Second, the safeguards that the agreement permits in case of sudden import "surges" or when low domestic prices persist make the prospects for significant real market access improvements quite uncertain.


The notion of lariffication" is in itself ambiguous and the process subject to potential abuse. In the absence of fairly detailed econometric models of the markets for commodities included in the exercise. the tariff levels could be chosen to provide unlimited protection, even after the phasing-in of agreed tariff reductions. This is evidenced by the fact that, in seine sectors and for some of the major trading partners. tariffication has resulted in tariff rates in the range of 200-500 per cent and export subsidies. With regard to market access, the agreement establishes that all non-tariff barriers (NTBs) across borders will be "tariffied" (that is, replaced by tariffs yielding the same level of protection). In the case of developed countries, all tariffs on agricultural products will be reduced on average !iv 36 per cent over a six-year period, with minimum reductions in each tariff line. n In view of the fact that many of the duties resulting from the process of iariffication will be at levels that will effectively ban imports, it was decided to provide quantitative guarantees of minimum market access.

With regard to measures of domestic assistance, it was agreed that, with the exception of those that have a minimal impact on trade (the so-called green box measures), all supports are to be included in an "Aggregate Measure of Support" (AMS), which must be reduced by 20 per cent during six years. With regard to agricultural export subsidies, it was agreed that countries would reduce budgetary outlays for such subsidies by 36 per cent over a six-year period from their average levels prevailing in 1986-1990, when they were substantially higher than they are now, and that subsidized quantities would be reduced by 21 per cent over the same period.

The impact of the agreement on world markets is. however, likely to be small. For producers of agricultural products that are heavily protected in developed countries (for example, sugar and wheat) market access will remain limited, owing mainly to the application of very high tariffs which will continue to grant virtually unlimited protection to domestic producers in several developed countries, and particularly in the EU, where protection of agriculture is the highest (see box VII.1). In addition, the commitments with regard to production and export subsidies are very modest, indicating that developing and transition economy producers will continue to have serious difficulties in competing with less efficient developed-country producers in third markets. Finally, even this modest liberalization package has loopholes in the form of special safeguards.

Net food importers, among which are some of the poorest developing countries, stand to lose in the short run by the agriculture agreement, as international food prices are bound to rise owing to the reduction in government subsidies and domestic support measures in the developed countries (and particularly in the EU). The degree of price increase is quite uncertain, but these countries may well require special financial assistance to adjust to the higher food prices. This is an area of potential cooperation between the World Trade Organization, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank.

Services

The Final Act of the Uruguay Round also set up a General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS), which is to become a constituent part of the World Trade Organization. As developing-country exports of services grow, the services agreement has the potential to affect importantly their export opportunities. It is a new area of endeavour for the GATT and part I of the GATS defines trade in services and its four "modes of supply": cross-border trade, which normally requires the movement of information; the movement of consumers; the establishment of a "commercial presencein a foreign country; and the movement of physical persons. These definitions recognize that many categories of services require the movement of persons and capital across national borders and therefore that national regulations of foreign direct investment and migration have the potential to act as serious barriers to trade.

GATS contains two sets of obligations: a general framework (part II) and specific commitments (part III). There are also annexes dealing with specific sectors (notably, air transport, telecommunications, and financial services) and with the movement of individuals. 
The central elenient of the general framework is the "most-favoured-nation (MFN) article. Countries must explicitly claim sectoral exemptions from MFN treatment at the start; such exemptions must be reviewed after five years and must have a maximum duration of ten years. National treatment and market access commitments are specified in the individual schedules of commitments relating to sectors and modes of supply.

All individual commitments with regard to national treatment and market access are specified in part III. This approach implies that, with the exception of the general norms contained within the framework agreement, whatever does not appear in the schedules of commitments is not liberalized and whatever is included is subject to the limitations that are specified therein. Members do in fact commit themselves to continue negotiations to progressively liberalize trade in services. The first round of negotiations is to take place within a five-year period.

All in all, GATS promises modest progress in liberalizing trade in services. The extent of sectoral coverage varies widely between offers. Sectors with a high degree of coverage include tourism, business services, value-added communication services and financial services. The majority of commitments involve the "commercial presence" mode of supply, reflecting the interest of all groups of countries in attracting foreign investment.

A GATS annex, of particular importance to many developing economies, deals with the movement of labour across national borders. These countries have a comparative advantage in labour-intensive services (including tourism, cleaning services, construction and engineering, data processing, medical and quasi-medical services, and the development of software of low complexity) and the full exploitation of that comparative advantage depends on significant reductions of barriers to labour mobility.

The annex specifies that agreements on the movement of labour will deal with measures affecting physical persons who are suppliers of services or are employed by a supplier of services and that the measures are to be in relation to services in which specific commitments have been made by a member. Measures that affect citizenship, permanent residence or employment are specifically excluded. Most countries confined their liberalization offers with regard to the movement of persons to the movement of company managers and specialist staff, leaving open the question of the degree of coverage of the right to the temporary movement of labour for purposes of supplying services or working in the employ of a service supplier.

Phasing out the Multi-Fibre Arrangement

Since the 1960s, the strong comparative advantage of developing countries in the production of textiles and clothing and the political strength of textile and clothing producers in industrialized countries have kept international trade in these goods outside the accepted principles of the GATT. Initially, the agricultural commodities and the price support mechanism has been a major drain on the EU budget. However, the European Community (EC) finally agreed to start market-oriented reforms of some sectors of the CAP in 1992. While its operations are now being adapted to the recently completed agreements in the Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations, it is questionable whether the impact on agricultural trade, in particular as regards exports of the developing countries, will really be significant in the end. Although quite divisive, the CAP plays too central a political role in the EU for the member States to attempt any radical changes at this juncture in its carefully regulated trade network.

History

When Belgium, France, Germany, Italy, Luxembourg and the Netherlands signed the Treaty of Rome in 1957 to establish the European Economic Community, they committed themselves to including the agricultural sector in their common market. The six founding members were all net importers of agricultural products, and as memories of food shortages and wartime rationing were still alive, the security of domestic food supplies and the longterm perspectives for national farmers were natural priorities for all countries concerned. A stimulus to an increase in agricultural production and the creation of a larger market with more choice for consumers seemed to be the obvious instruments to fulfil these policy aims.

In view of the highly divergent performances of member States in the agricultural sector and the prominent role each member attributed to the welfare of its farming community, it was clear from the start that a common, border-free market could not be based on unrestricted competition if the political and social objectives of maintaining a vibrant farming community were to be achieved. Thus, the philosophy behind the CAP involved the aim to establish unified, remunerative prices as a mechanism to provide adequate incomes to all Community farmers and to guarantee minimum prices through market intervention (if necessary), thereby greatly reducing the financial risk for the producers. Financial responsibility for all aspects of the CAP was to be exercised collectively, and the European Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund, an integral part of the Community budget, was set up in 1962 to provide the common financial resources

With some exceptions, outside suppliers of products covered by the CAP were only allowed into the market at prices at or above target prices, depending on whether or not imports were regarded as necessary to satisfy demand. Such a market organization was progressively adopted for cereals, meat, dairy products, sugar, temperate fruit, wine and vegetables and oil-seeds. The difference between world-market prices and so-called threshold prices for imports was offset by charging variable border levies on the imports. Thus, only product groups not covered by the CAP offered non-EC suppliers sound, longterm export potential to the EC market. However, the number of unrestricted product groups decreased sharply over the years, eventually leaving only tropical products (except bananas and cane-sugar), beverages other than wine and non-food agricultural products outside the purview of CAP market organization.

The picture was made more complex because the Community tried to integrate preexisting international trade links into the CAP through a system of trade preferences. A series of bilateral association agreements was thus concluded with the members of the European Free Trade Association and the southern European States (most of which had meanwhile joined the EU). Agreements were also signed with non-European Mediterranean States (their agricultural export arrangements had to be renegotiated after the accession of Greece, Spain and Portugal).

Special arrangements were also made for a third tier of traditional suppliers, consisting of a large number of developing countries in the African, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) States. These mainly newly independent States were vitally concerned not to lose tradi-tional export markets when their former colonial powers reoriented their agricultural sectors towards the CAP. The institutional and operational framework for the new EC-ACP relationship evolved in a series of agreements and is now governed by the 1990 Lome IV Convention covering 70 ACP countries. Agricultural trade policy is only one aspect of the lomO Convention, which encompasses the much wider context of the Community's development aid and cooperation efforts, but it has been quite an important one. The provisions for agricultural trade are more restrictive than for other products, although the basic principle is that ACP countries should enjoy duty-free access or at least receive more favourable treatment than any other third country. The setting out in protocols to the Lome Convention of special measures for a number of products, such as sugar, bananas, beef and rum, amounts to perpetuating certain trade practices originating in the colonial era by including them under CAP market organization.

Agricultural imports and exports

Even though Community agricultural policy thus excludes a level playing-field for many agricultural products, annual imports in the 1990s have nevertheless been in the range of $55 billion $60 billion, compared with intra-EC trade in agricultural goods of over $100 billion. Over 50 per cent originates from developing countries (with ACP States and members' overseas territories accounting for roughly a quarter), over 30 per cent comes from other developed market economies (with roughly one third from the United States) and some 7 per cent from the transition economies. This notwithstanding, a far-reaching process of trade diversion resulted from the CAP, as member countries switched from traditional outside suppliers to intra-Community sources, while there was also considerable intra-EC trade creation.. Trade diversion was repeated every time new members joined and was accelerated in all product areas where the Community approached or exceeded self-sufficiency (in particular, cereals, beef, milk and wine). To give an example. in 1961 the six founding members and Great Britain, Denmark and Ireland imported over 70 per cent of their agricultural products from third countries. By 1989, although total volume grew, this percentage had dropped to about 37 per cent.b

By the late 1970s, the CAP had brought about rampant overproduction and in the 1980s it pushed high-cost Community products onto the world market under a system of export subsidies introduced to try to reduce excess stocks. The expense to the taxpayer was considerable, as farmers continued to be paid the support prices for output that was sold at low world prices. At the same time, these exports angered other agricultural exporters, whose competitive advantages were cancelled out by what they saw as a gross violation of fair trade. Thus, CAP became an important issue in the GATT Uruguay Round, at a time when calls for CAP reform also became louder inside the Community as surpluses accumulated and budget expenditure skyrocketed..

Reform

Major reform of CAP was finally launched in June 1992 The overriding aim was to stop excessive production of cereals, oil-seeds and protein crops as well as beef and dairy products. This vvas to be achieved by (a) lowering guaranteed prices (29 per cent for cereals, 15 per cent for beef over three years); (b) withdrawing land from production (15 per cent of arable land for cereals, oil-seeds and protein crops); (c) imposing ceilings or scaling down existing ones for intervention purchases; (d) granting higher one-off premiums for slaughter of cattle; and (e) creating incentives for environment-friendly, extensive cropand cattle-farming methods.d

The longer-term objective of the reforms is to restore a more market-oriented approach to the CAP (albeit within a framework of protective mechanisms), and to shift the CAP from price/production support to direct income support for farmers. For political and social reasons, the Community has alleviated the negative impact on farming CAP budget expenditures on guaranteed prices, including export refunds and storage costs. rose by over 50 per cent in real terms between 1980 and 1',  reaching the equivalent of about $31 billion in 1988. 63 per cent of the EC budget of that year. Intervention stocks for cereals reached a peak at 18.5 million tons in 1986. After an intermittent drop they jumped to 26.3 million tons by 1992. 


The final GATT agreement on agriculture in the Uruguay Round also affects the CAP. Its terms for developed countries require (over a six-year transition period) (a) the conversion of all existing import controls into conventional import tariffs and a tariff reduction of 36 per cent, (b) a reduction of 21 per cent in the volume and 36 per cent in the value of export subsidies, and (c) a reduction of 20 per cent in overall levels of support to domestic agriculture. The potential impact on EU farmers' incomes, a politically divisive issue in Europe, has been mitigated by exemptions. Also, a clause allowing direct income support under production-limiting programmes is tailored to cover EU (and also United States) compensation schemes currently in place.

Results?

Looking ahead to the implementation of the Uruguay Round agreement on agriculture under the CAP, it is quite likely that progress in agricultural trade liberalization will be rather limited. In essence, the reform of the CAP has not changed the principles of Community preference and internal market protection; all concessions agreed in the final round of the GATT talks were also designed to limit the impact on the CAP beyond the measures already agreed on price and surplus reduction. In addition, when issues such as enhanced market access are to be assessed, the EU if challenged will continue to argue that its special treatment of ACP States and its system of generalized preferences for all developing countries must be taken into account.

In accordance with the agreement, variable import levies are being abandoned and replaced by appropriate tariff structures, but the price differential in favour of Community products is to be largely maintained In other words, "niche products" aside, any sizeable new imports of cereals, meat or dairy products would likely cause serious disturbance in an already oversupplied market, thus allowing the EU to trigger restrictive measures, as specified in article 5 of the agreement on agriculture and in the agreement on safeguards. These could include additional import duties or temporary variable import levies. Finally, the agriculture agreement's exemptions leave enough scope for any politically desired level of domestic support to be relabelled as compensation payments, and these are not timebound.

The recent experience under new arrangements for agricultural trade with the transition economies may be indicative. Since 1992, the so-called Europe Agreements with the Czech Republic, Hungary, Slovakia, Poland and (since 1993) Bulgaria and Romania have set a framework for agricultural trade on the basis of tariff quotas, with an accelerating timetable for asymmetrical, progressive tariff reductions and quota enlargements in favour of the eastern Europeans. The approach towards the liberalization of agricultural imports from these newly associated economies was quite different from the treatment of imports of manufactured goods.' In effect, access to the common agricultural market has been improved only marginally for these economies, as large-scale imports would invariably have upset the delicate balance of CAP supply management. Indeed, EC agricultural exports to these countries have risen much faster than imports from them.

Ultimately, especially in the light of the plans to negotiate EU membership with several countries that have large agricultural sectors, the CAP will be all but unaffordable. Thus, proposals put forward by independent experts all focus on the need to phase out production-related subsidies and separate the economic aspects of agriculture from social measures. A recent study undertaken for the European Commission by a group of independent agricultural economists came to the conclusion that the reforms under way had to be extended, coupled with further reductions in support prices for most farm products,

UndertheEuropeAgreements,mostmanufactured goods imported from the newly associated countries were ranted immediate free access to the EU and only some "sensitive" manufactured products are subject to a gradual phasing-out of tariffs and non-tariff barriers; however, the agreements do not foresee the ultimate elimination of EU tarifs and quantitative restrictions on the imports of agricultural products from these countries. On the other hand, there are also factors operating to slow the growth of the supply of agricultural exports from the associated transi. hen economies In particular, agricultural subsidies in the countries of central and eastern Europe have been drastically reduced on average in the past several years and farmers in these countries now find themselves in a rather uncompetitive position if a financial collapse of the CAP after eastern enlargement was to be avoided! Incomes for farmers could increasingly be topped up from national budgets. As long as national support payments remained transparent, and did not encourage production or create unfair advantages within the CAP for one set of national farmers, a partial "renationalization" of the Community's agricultural budget could provide more financial scope for other, future-oriented programmes designed to ease transition from traditional patterns to a new concept of rural development and environmental land management, which was no longer based exclusively on agricultural production

While these arguments are likely to set the tone for the incipient debate on further CAP reform, the European Commission has not endorsed the report's conclusions and is now in the process of preparing its own proposal on a "pre-accession strategy" for eastern European countries. In fact. EU leaders as well as the Commission have adopted a "waitand-see" attitude on the CAP as there is no political consensus on how or even whether CAP needs to be reformed in the near future. Besides, any suggestions that might lead to an unravelling of the CAP and its unified, supranational structure are strongly opposed both in Brussels and in a majority of member States.

What has been unique about the MFA is that while safeguards are usually thought of as assisting producers in one country that are harmed by an import surge, here the industrialized countries as a group claimed they needed protection and thus sought to manage world trade in these products. Country and country-group participants in the MFA have thus fallen into two groups: the importers and the exporters. Among the former, Austria, Canada, the European Union, Finland, Norway and the United States have applied stringent quantitative restrictions to textile and clothing imports, while Japan and Switzerland have not. The restrictions were either bilaterally agreed or unilaterally imposed limits on imports, typically on a product-by-product basis but in some cases at the aggregate level as well.n

The Uruguay Round sought to bring the trade in textiles and clothing under GNU rules and thus the objective was to define the modalities for winding down the MFA. Once the agreement to do so is fully implemented, the only border measures allowed will be tariffs. However, the integration of textile trade into GATT rules is to be extremely slow (almost 50 per cent of all trade is to be governed by the MFA until the last day of the 10-year transition period), which reduces the value of the agreement for developing-country exporters. Moreover, special safeguards during the transition period could make actual liberalization even slower.

The new "rules of the game"

The long experience of managed international trade in textiles and clothing is a major example of the departure of actual trade practices from the liberal principles embodied in international agreements, but it is not the only one and developing-country exporters have not been the only targets of import limitations. That this happened and happened on many occasions reflected both the politics of interest groups in different countries and the differences in economic power among countries. Yet while there were several international arenas where complaints about protectionism could be lodged, there was no effective forum to which developing countries or developed ones for that matter could apply to have the general principles enforced. The Uruguay Round sought to remedy this situation, as the provisions regarding use of safeguard and "anti-dumping" actions indicate.

Safeguards and anti-dumping

One of the principal interests of developing countries in the Uruguay Round was to revise GATT's provisions on safeguards in order to prevent individual countries from continuing to resort to the selective and discriminatory grey area measures against successful exporters in lieu of safeguards. This is an issue that has had a long history in GATT negotiations. GATT's original safeguards clause (article XIX) was supposed to act as a temporary safety-valve in cases of import surges which had adverse impacts on domestic producers, so as to allow them enough time to adjust to import competition. However, article XIX has rarely been invoked, owing mainly to the requirements that safeguard action should comply with the most-favoured-nation principle (that is, not discriminate against the exporters of one country) and that affected parties have the right to compensation.

During the Tokyo Round of multilateral trade negotiations, agreement on safeguards could not be reached, largely because of the insistence of developed countries on the right to apply selective quantitative restrictions as safeguards.13 Developed countries, instead of having recourse to article XIX, have preferred so-called voluntary export restraints and remedies directed at "unfair" trading practices; these can be targeted at individual exporters and have less stringent provisions regarding injury tests.

The big drawback of the agreement on safeguards is that it legitimizes the use of quantitative restrictions aimed at individual exporters as safeguards, but it does so in exchange for more transparent and stringent rules on their application. The use of selective quantitative restrictions could lead to the reinstatement of grey area measures, now with legal sanction. However, in certain respects, the agreement takes steps towards improving the disciplines to be applied in this area. It prohibits the imposition of new grey area measures and calls for the elimination of all existing measures over a period of four years, with the exception of one specific measure by an importing country, which will have to be eliminated no later than 31 December 1999. Likewise, all safeguard measures adopted under article XIX will be terminated over a period of not more than eight years from the time of their adoption or five years from the moment of the entry into force of the World Trade Organization, whichever comes later. Safeguard measures cannot be retained for periods longer than four years, although under certain circumstances they can be renewed for a maximum of eight years. The agreement also has special provisions for developing countries.

Just as safeguard measures target foreign suppliers to give local producers time to become more effective competitors, anti-dumping measures target foreign suppliers for allegedly unfair competition. Since only the unfair competitors would warrant punishment, anti-dumping measures are by nature selective trade-policy penalties. In earlier years, the practice of assessing anti-dumping penalties was mainly limited to some of the industrialized countries; more recently, however, developing countries have also begun learning to use antidumping practices themselves. Thus, an important objective of the Uruguay Round was to discipline the use of such practices.

Anti-dumping penalties are generally assigned after the Government of the importing country carries out an investigation and finds that dumping has occurred. Two conditions are necessary to establish the presence of dumping. In the first place, the exporter's prices for sale abroad must be below domestic prices. Secondly, the foreign firm must have the intention and the ability to displace domestic producers and monopolize the market. In the case of developing-country exporters of manufactures, while the first condition has often applied, particularly in cases of start-up operations or of new exporters, establishment of the second is generally quite difficult to carry off, since most developing-country firms are small and unlikely to be in a position to capture an important share of a foreign market, particularly that of a developed country. This notwithstanding, most anti-dumping actions have been aimed precisely at developing-country exporters.

The optimum outcome of the Uruguay Round in the area of anti-dumping would have been to make it considerably more difficult to initiate unwarranted anti-dumping proceedings. Here, the agreement is only a partial success. On the one hand, it establishes fairly detailed and more transparent norms and the agreement's sunset clause (set at five years) is a welcome addition. On the other hand, the agreement is unsatisfactory on a number of counts. In the first place, it retains the use of "constructed values" in price comparisons and in the calculation of dumping margins, when domestic prices in the exporting country or prices in a comparable third market are unavailable. Since there are no objective criteria for calculating these values,14 their continued use will almost certainly leave openings for protectionist abuse of anti-dumping practices.

Second, there are some clauses in the agreement that potentially are an improvement over current practice but insufficient to ensure against protectionist abuses. One such case is the de minimis provision, under which countries agree to terminate anti-dumping investigations when dumping margins do not exceed 2 per cent or when dumped imports are deemed insignificant" (less than 3 per cent of the imports of the product). Minimum dumping margins and minimum levels of imports to justify an investigation protect exporters against the most flagrant abuses of anti-dumping, but they have both been set at extremely low levels. Dumping in any meaningful sense is impossible when the dumped imports constitute a substantial percentage of the product's imports but not of its consumption.

Operation of the World Trade Organization

The World Trade Organization will be responsible for the orderly management of world trade relations into the next century. Its tasks include facilitating the implementation and operation of all agreements and legal instruments negotiated in the Uruguay Round, providing a forum for all future negotiations and administering the Dispute Settlement Body (DSB) and the Trade Policy Review Mechanism (TPRM) which were established on a temporary basis at the Montreal mid-term review of the Uruguay Round in December 1988.

The initial members of the World Trade Organization are countries that were contracting parties to the GATT of 1947. as amended over the years, that accepted the three core agreements (CATS, TRIPs, and the GATT of 1994, which contains the agreements on goods resulting from the Uruguay Round), and that made specific concessions with respect to market access in both goods and services.

There is, in other words, a unified nature to the requirements for member-ship in the World Trade Organization. This will preclude the splintering of the new trading system into multiple layers of differing rules. However, the survival of four plurilateral trade agreements that bind only their signatories's and the threat that other such agreements may be signed in the future could jeopardize the universal application of the principles of unconditional MFN and non-discrimination in the trading system.

The World Trade Organization will have important implications for the multilateral trading system in general and for developing countries in particular. First, the World Trade Organization will stand on a firmer legal basis than existing GATT arrangements. It will have a legal personality and will be accorded privileges and responsibilities for international trade, placing it on an equal footing with IMF and the World Bank. Indeed, the Final Act calls for cooperation among the World Trade Organization, the World Bank and IMF in order to improve the coordination of trade, financial, and monetary policies.

Second, surveillance of trade policies (broadly defined to include all &peels under the jurisdiction of the World Trade Organization) is improved by the periodic reviews of individual countries' policies via the TpRm and annual reviews of international trade. Regular ministerial meetings are provided for so as to ensure the effectiveness of the World Trade Organization. Improved and centralized arrangements under which members notify the World Trade Organization of changes in trade measures are also to be instituted.

There is a concern, however, that surveillance of World Trade Organization member countries might not be symmetric, that is, applied with equal force as regards developed and developing countries. In other words, there is a fear in some quarters that with cooperation provided for among the World Trade Organization, the Fund and the Bank, the financial power of the last two institutions will be deployed to impose enforcement of the rules of the World Trade Organization mainly on the developing countries, while the stronger trading powers are left with wide latitude to apply restrictive trade measures (for example, in the anti-dumping or safeguards areas). Certainly, cooperation between the Bretton Woods institutions and the World Trade Organization ought to centre instead on ensuring the global coherence of international policies in the areas of trade, finance and money, so as to promote more rapid growth of the world economy.

Perhaps most importantly, countries committed themselves in the Final Act not to take unilateral action against perceived violations of trade rules. Instead, they pledged to seek recourse in the World Trade Organization's new disputesettlement machinery and to abide by its rules and procedures. Under the World Trade Organization, there will be a single DSB dealing with all disputes arising from the agreements contained in the Final Act. It will have considerably expanded powers compared with predecessor bodies in the GATE Its creation is the most important contribution of the Round in terms of providing security and predictability to the multilateral trading system. The DSB will set up panels, adopt reports, supervise the implementation of rulings and recommendations. and authorize retaliation. Under the GAIT in comparison, dispute settlement was fragmented between the GAIT Council and the committees set up by the Tokyo Round Codes.

The new dispute-settlement rules establish a sequence of phases that a complainant must follow and, with a view to speeding up the process, sets maximum time periods for each phase. This is a significant improvement over GATT practice, whereby the offending country had many opportunities to introduce delays over procedural matters. Another important new feature distinguishes the World Trade Organization mechanism from current practice. Now there will have to be a consensus against the establishment of panels or the adoption of panel reports for decisions not to be made, whereas under the current system there had to be consensus before a positive decision could be taken. Thus, under the new system, parties to a dispute can no longer block decisions against them. However, panel decisions can now be appealed to a standing Appellate Body.

Nevertheless, a last-minute modification proposed by the United States to the anti-dumping agreement has effectively isolated anti-dumping procedures from the unified dispute-settlement system. In essence, multilateral panels have not been granted authority to challenge the substance of national antidumping investigations. Therefore, the new anti-dumping rules will remain subject to discretionary interpretation in national laws. This is an important Loophole which could transform anti-dumping into an area on the cutting edge of protectionism. This clause is subject to review after a five-year period.

A striking feature of the World Trade Organization is the possible linkage of market access in goods and World Trade Organization obligations in the areas of intellectual property and trade in services. That is, cross-sectoral retaliation is now possible, under which restrictive action can be taken against exports of goods in retaliation for offending policy measures in the new areas. However, crass-retaliation is allowed only as the third in a three-step procedure. In principle, suspensions of concessions should be restricted to the sector in dispute. If this is not practicable or effective, the suspension can be made in a different sector of the same agreement. Only as a last resort should the suspension of concessions be made under another agreement (for example, with a dispute under the intellectual property agreement leading to retaliation in the areas of goods or services).

The creation of the World Trade Organization and its DSB raises the question of how far recourse to unilateral action such as that under section 301 of the United States Trade Act of 1988 will be curtailed. Although the spirit of the DVorld Trade Organization is against unilateral action, it is far from certain that the United States will give up recourse to section 301.11 However, the World Trade Organization can contribute to the curtailment of unilateral action. If the United States (or any other country contemplating such action) abides by its international commitments, it will have to first bring its disputes to the World Trade Organization and go through the various phases specified in the dispute-settlement mechanism before retaliating against the offending party.n This could prove to be a significant extension of the rule of law in international economic relations. If the political will is strong enough for the major trading powers to abide by the decisions of the DSB, its creation will have provided a counter to the unilateral actions and threats to which the international trading community has grown accustomed in recent years.

Trade policy for development

Developing countries have emerged from the Uruguay Round in a stronger position than ever before, albeit with less generous "special and differential" treatment. Many countries have made important contributions to the success of the Round, and they will continue to participate actively in the World Trade Organization. The agenda for developing countries is reasonably clear. As regards traditional items, there is still much to be done to improve and secure market access in goods: tariffs on items of interest to developing countries are still high, tariff escalation has not been removed, and trade in agriculture and textiles has only begun to be liberalized. Indeed, the system emerging from the Uruguay Round can best be described as one of carefully managed improvements in market access.

More generally, the anti-dumping agreement might well prove unsatisfactory, and counties are like!) to press for norms that limit the initiation of anti-dumping proceedings to cases where the imports in question constitute a significant proportion of consumption in the importing country (say, at least 10 per cent) rather than of imports. In new areas, the liberalization of trade in services that require the movement of labour across borders should find its way into the agenda.

Also, the World Trade Organization has been given a mandate to include in future negotiations the issues of environmental and labour standards. It will not be an easy matter to harmonize policies in these areas. The reason is that harmonization can be expected to take the form of aligning policies on developed-country standards, and this may reduce the grounds for competition between developingand developed-country producers. Nevertheless, the demands of environmental groups and labour unions on these matters must be addressed. Therefore, the challenge ahead is to constructively draft multilateral rules that expand or preserve access to markets and preclude punitive unilateral action, while taking into consideration environmental and labour concerns.

One can see, in short, that developing countries have now become more activist advocates of multilateral trade policy, taking a seat at the negotiating table and seeking to bolster an international system of enforceable rules. Indeed, as of 31 December 1994, 128 countries had become contracting parties to the GATE with Djibouti, Papua New Guinea and Solomon Islands having just joined, and these plus some 20 additional countries (virtually the entire world) will become the member countries of the World Trade Organization. On the other hand, developing countries have also become active outside of the GATT, as regional trading arrangements have burgeoned in recent years, both among developing countries and with developed-country partners, as evidenced by Mexico's participation in the North American Free Trade Area and various bilateral agreements with the FUJI

From a global perspective, special arrangements for the developing countries are still warranted, but the political reality is that the range of concessions accorded by industrialized countries has narrowed appreciably. Developing countries, at least those in a position to do so, are adjusting to this reality.

CONOMIC AND

SOCIA t SURVEY 1995

 DIFFICULT TIMES FOR OFFICIAL FINANCE FOR DEVELOPMENT

Set next to the highly volatile private financial flows into and out of developing countries over the years which drove the overall net transfer of resources from positive (inflows) to negative (outflows) and back official finance has been a more stable, otirce of resource transfers (see figure V11.1). Since the middle 1980s, however. the net transfers on account of official flows have been roughly half of what they were in the early 1980s, that is, roughly $15 billion a year instead of about $30 billion (the one exception being for the year of the conflict between Iraq and Kuwait). The official flows that declined were first IMF loans, which had earlier burgeoned in the wake of the developing-country debt crisis (see table A.29), and also export credits, as on the one hand developing countries had to curtail imports of capital equipment and other large-scale items that such financing supported, and on the other, many countries lost "export cover" owing to their debt crises. Multilateral development financing, however, continued at a fairly strong pace; but it peaked in the early 1990s (see table A.34). Receipts of official development assistance (ODA) also seem to have peaked.


The total flows of ODA. when measured in constant prices and exchange rates instead of in dollars. had in fact stagnated during the 1980s, as some donors had to cut back their aid efforts. These included the formerly centrally planned economies, many of which became net recipients of concessional assistance in the 1990s after beginning their transition to market economies." Another group of donors that had to cut back their aid efforts were the major oil-exporting countries. Mainly as a result of wars in the Middle East and soft oil prices. Arab donors now down to three countries: Kuwait, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates went from supplying almost 15 per cent of assistance from market economies to about 2.5 per cent (see table A.33). Thus, aside from small amounts of assistance from other developing countries, ODA flows are now almost entirely those of the industrialized countries that coordinate their efforts through the Development Assistance Committee (DAC) of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD); but even these flows peaked in 1992 and, indeed, a major reassessment of aid programmes in DAC member countries is under way.

Official development assistance (ODA): end of an era?

In almost every one of the past 20 years, DAC countries raised the total real level of ODA, channelling it as bilateral financial transfers to developing countries, technical assistance. write-offs of official debt, or contributions to the concessional windows of the multilateral development institutions. With the drop in 1993, however, a long-feared stagnation and perhaps even decline in total ODA from DAC member countries may have begun." Certainly, measured as a share of GNP, overall ODA from DAC countries has been fairly constant for decades; but as GNP was growing, so too were aid programmes (see figure VI1.2). As of 1993, however, even this can no longer be taken for granted.

A great deal of attention has focused, quite naturally, on the decline in United States aid. Measured in constant prices, United States aid fell 19 per cent in 1993, as reported by DAC; but even excluding the United States, ODA of other DAC members taken together fell 6 per cent. By the same token, the fall in the ODA/GNP ratio as seen in figure VII.2 was not entirely due to the fall in the United States ratio. The ratio excluding the United States fell as well, from 0.41 per cent of GNP to 0.38 per cent. This notwithstanding, the cut-back in ODA of the United States has been especially dramatic and worrisome to fellow DAC members, as a withdrawal of the United States from a leadership role "poses a risk of undermining political support for development cooperation in other DAC countries".21 Although the United States remains the second largest donor, its ODA/GNP ratio has fallen to 0.15 per cent (from 0.20 in 1992), half the DAC average.

In contrast, the largest donor, Japan, is still building up its aid programme. Although its ratio of ODA to GNP has also been slipping and remains below the DAC average, the Government is committed to increased ODA levels in the medium term. That is, under the fifth medium-term target for ODA, which covers the period 1993 to 1997, Japan's total ODA volume is expected to rise to $70-75 billion on a net disbursement basis, representing an almost 50 per cent increase over the previous five years.22

It is becoming clear that in a period of generalized fiscal constraint and austere budgets, along with a refocusing of attention on domestic social and economic issues, questions are being raised in several donor countries on the degree to which aid to developing countries is efficient, or even effective. The malaise about ODA has acquired a name, "aid fatigue" (also "donor fatigue"), and is said to be quite widespread. It has even been identified among some segments of Japanese opinion, although the Government sees itself as having the responsibility of countering that view and bolstering public support for development assistance.

The political base for development assistance in donor countries has always been a complicated one, involving promotion of the security and commercial interests of donor countries (a reading of parliamentary debates about aid generally makes this clear) as well as the expression of feelings of humanitarian solidarity. Aid is also anchored to international commitments made in the General Assembly and other international forums.

More than an income transfer to developing countries, aid is an investment in development. Thus, after 30 or more years of development assistance, questions are increasingly being asked about the appropriate duration of aid: how long should a country require ODA inflows before its development becomes self-sustaining? What is to be made of the countries that have been long-run recipients of ODA and in which per capita output fell for decades? Did the ODA prevent an even more rapid decline? How should one measure the "product i\ ty" of ODA?

With questions such as these being posed, the political environment in several donor countries for continued assistance on a substantial scale to many long-term recipients is frankly critical and in some instances quite hostile. However, none of the Governments of traditional donor countries have abandoned the concept of ODA and some of the more rapidly growing developing countries have begun modest aid programmes of their own. Also, traditional donors have increasingly been called upon to support new aid programmes for countries in transition from deep social conflict to peace-building and have responded to the call; but sharp questions of cost effectiveness are being posed everywhere.

Donor agencies have thus increasingly tried to ensure better use of and accountability for aid by the recipient countries. For instance, the Canadian Government adopted a strategy for aid to Africa that would emphasize regional integration possibilities and formulation of a coherent overall approach of the Canadian International Development Agency, entailing more interaction with other Canadian Government departments and the setting up of a system whereby Canadian and African participants collectively determined programming priorities. Norway, too, will emphasize increased policy dialogue with its aid recipients and the gradual transfer of responsibility for planning and implementation of programmes to local counterparts, this being an area that the DAC review of Norwegian aid had sought to encourage.

To enhance aid effectiveness, some donor countries have reorganized their aid agencies. Sweden has reduced the number of its official development cooperation agencies to two (one to handle long-term cooperation with poorer developing countries, and the other to manage aid activities in the industrial and infrastructure sectors). The United States has overhauled its Agency for International Development, simplifying its structure and focusing its efforts towards achieving sustainable development in the areas of economic growth, population and health, environment and democracy.

A related issue is coordinating the multiple official assistance efforts for each recipient by donor countries and multilateral institutions, in terms both of programming the assistance and of implementing it in the field. Coordination of assistance to individual countries typically takes place through the consultative groups or round-table meetings, as organized by the World Bank and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), as well as in the recipient countries. At the broadest level, principles are agreed in the General Assembly and other forums, while donors seek to agree upon implementing aid principles and establishing operational guidelines through DAC and its subgroups.24 A more intensive level of coordination takes place through joint donor programmes, which sometimes take the form of bilateral co-financing of, say, World Bank projects (for example, under the chapeau of the Special Pro-granune Assistance for Africa at the World Bank) or through contributions to multilateral assistance itself.

Joint or bilateral aid: the case of the European Development Fund

There are advantages and disadvantages to coordinated or joint assistance from the donors' perspective, some of which can be seen in recent developments in the EU. While EU member countries have maintained national ODA programmes, they have also contributed increasingly to programmes separately managed by the Commission of the EU, especially through the periodically replenished and off-budget European Development Fund (EDF). The EDF was established to channel funds to the ACP countries many of them former colonies of European powers that were associated with the EU through the series of Lome conventions and their predecessors. These conventions ensured that at least as far as the ACP countries were concerned, EU would have a common foreign aid policy.

The common funding of Community aid programmes harmonized to a degree the "regionalist" approach to aid of countries with strong ties to the African continent, like France and Belgium, and to a certain extent, Italy, and the more "globalist" approach of Germany, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. 15 As a result, the share of sub-Saharan Africa in total German foreign aid, for example. increased from 16 per cent in 1970-1971 (before Lome I) to more than 25 per cent in the 1980s and 1990s. However, even as this was happening, forces were at work that led many members to question both the processes (generally, low conditionality) and the share and amounts of Community aid going to ACP countries.

In the 1990s, interest in transferring more aid funds to non-ACP countries intensified. Reasons for this involved, on the one hand, the economic and political imperatives on the eastern and Mediterranean flanks of the EU, and on the other, the Maastricht Treaty on European Union, which called for development of a common foreign policy and established a common policy on development cooperation.a In addition, EU countries have wanted to assist certain Latin American countries to fight narcotics traffic and have sought to develop closer ties to emerging markets in Asia and Latin America. Moreover, an important dimension of aid in recent years that has been supported by the budget of the EU Commission (and by member countries) aims to bolster the democratization process through technical assistance, grants to help hold elections, and to improve the justice system and other forms of institution-building.

Tensions about aid policies came to a head as part of the mid-term review of the Lome Treaty and the negotiations within the EU to replenish and bolster the EDF. In February 1995, France, which held the EU presidency at the time, and the European Commission proposed to increase the funds pledged to the current EDF from ECU (European currency units) 11 billion programmed to last until the year 1998 to over ECU 14 billion to last until the year 2000. It was also proposed that the EDF be enlarged to take account of the three new members of EU as of 1 January 1995 and to adjust for inflation.

The United Kingdom objected that, as a result, about 40 per cent of its aid budget would be under EU control, rather than under its bilateral programmes and it announced that it would reduce its contribution to EDF by 10 per cent as of 1998.23 Germany, too, cited its desire to put a ceiling on its contribution to Lome funds and refused to accept the inflation adjustment. As of late April. the negotiations remained deadlocked.

In short, even if joint aid programmes can be efficient, they entail dilution of national control over the issue of which countries are given what amount of assistance for what purposes, and donor Governments seem increasingly reluctant to give up this control. Aside from losing opportunities to use aid as a tool of foreign polic. there are significant differences among donors as regards how aid should best be used to promote development; and as overall aid budgets are tightly constrained, competition among prospective uses of the limited resources have sharpened. This can be seen as well in the international treatment of debt relief for low-income countries.
Aid and debt relief

Some ODA takes the form of general budgetary support or balance-of-payments financing; this means that no limitations are put on how the funds are used (although policy conditions for accessing the funds can be rigorous). Other cases involve more restricted tranfers, but they too can be used for almost any purpose; that is to say, as a general proposition funds transferred from one Government to another are "fungible". For example, ODA funds that are given to a Government for support of education can be used for debtservicing if the Government's own spending on education is reduced and the freed local resources are used instead to pay interest and principal on the debt. Therefore, even if a donor wishes to focus its assistance programmes on particular social and economic sectors, it cannot be indifferent to the macroeconomic and financial situation of the recipient and the pressures on it to make compensating shifts of funds.

Donors have found it necessary, in other words, to pay close attention to the debt situation of low-income, aid-receiving countries and the budgetary and balance-of-payments implications of the debt. In some cases, donors have explicitly helped aid-recipient countries to service their foreign debt, in particular when countries fell into arrears to the multilateral financial institutions and sought to work their way out of the problem in cooperation with the international community. a In other cases, under great pressure to reduce budget deficits and also service debt, increased aid flows appear to have helped cover debt-servicing through the fungibility mechanism.

Within this context, donors have understandably been concerned about the fact that debt difficulties, especially of the severely indebted, low-income countries, have been so difficult to bring to an end. The World Bank estimated, for example, that interest arrears alone constituted 10 per cent of the total debt of these countries at the end of 1994, a fraction that has risen in every year of the 1990s.2$ Donors are also fully aware that the donor Governments and multilateral institutions are the largest creditors of the lowest-income countries and thus a significant part of the aid-financed debt-servicing that has occurred was merely returned to the initiating treasuries and multilateral institutions. Therefore, some $6 billion of the loans that had originally been incurred as ODA credits were forgiven between 1989 and 1993 by donor Governments, the bulk of them in sub-Saharan Africa. Donor Governments have also written off about $8 billion in non-concessional debts of these countries from 1990 to 1993.3,

However, even with debt-relief measures such as these, the concessional financial flows from the international community generally were not of a sufficient magnitude to fill the financing gap. Multiple defaults on official export credit payments and other official debt-servicing obligations to the donor countries occurred and the work-out from each default was treated under the Paris Club mechanism. Initially, the Paris Club would only reschedule debtservicing obligations, charging commercial interest rates on the outstanding balances. The Paris Club moved more slowly than the private bank creditors in recognizing that countries had become insolvent and that levels of debt in many low-income countries exceeded any reasonable measure of capacity to pay.r By the 1990s, however, increasing amounts of scheduled debt-servicing had been written off.

In 1995, the Paris Club began applying its most concessional set of debtrestructuring terms, including the option of reducing the debt-servicing of covered debt by up to 67 per cent. Under these "Naples terms", named after the 1994 summit meeting of the Group of Seven major industrialized countries, at which the decision was taken to ease the debt-servicing of low-income, heavily indebted countries, creditors may also decide to reduce the stock of non-concessional debt by up to 67 per cent under certain circumstances. This notwithstanding, of the Seven Paris Club agreements under the Naples terms in the first quarter of 1995, only one (Uganda) embodied the stock-reduction option.n

One reason why deep cuts were needed in bilateral official (and also private) debt of low-income, heavily indebted countries was that the debt owed to multilateral institutions had been exempted from demands for debt and debtservice reduction. It had been argued that any restructuring of those credits would reduce the creditworthiness of the institutions themselves and penalize all developing countries, as they would have to pay higher interest charges as a result. Nevertheless, it had increasingly been recognized that even with the most favourable debt-restructuring terms, some of the poorest and most heavily indebted countries would never be able to service all their obligations to the multilateral financial institutions.

Although the institutions do not have provisions to reschedule or write-off their credits, they have engaged in indirect refinancing; for example, new balance-of-payments loans on highly concessional terms have helped to finance the debt-servicing of older non-concessional loans. In addition, for countries that had once borrowed from the non-concessional window of the World Bank but now qualified only for concessional loans from the Bank's International Development Association (IDA), a special "fifth dimension" lending programme was established by IDA. It provides to countries already under IDA programmes supplementary credits in proportion to the interest obligations due on non-concessional World Bank debt. Since IDA loans are highly concessional, this effectively subsidizes the original interest payments without formally restructuring Bank debt.

Many believe that these techniques, while helping to alleviate the burden of multilateral debt-servicing, need to be supplemented by additional ones. On 27 September 1994, the British Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr. Kenneth Clarke, speaking at the Commonwealth Finance Ministers meeting at Valletta, Malta, proposed additional mechanisms to reduce the cost of servicing loans owed to IMF, the World Bank and the regional development banks. The most specific proposal was for the debt owed to IMF.

Currently, IMF lends on concessional terms to low-income countries through its Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility (ESAF). Loans have an original maturity of 10 years and repayments do not begin for 5 years. Disbursements can be over a three-year period, under a joint Fund/Bank -Policy Framework Paper" arrangement. The interest rate is only 0.5 per cent per year. Mr. Clarke proposed establishing a "new ESAF windowwhose loans would carry a longer maturity and grace period. The new loans would be available to low-income, heavily indebted developing countries "after a sustained period of Fund programmes-. One reason for the time factor in the eligibility criterion is the borrower's need to first establish a positive track record on reform. Another reason is that significant repayment obligations accrue after a sequence of Fund programmes.

The proposal would require two forms of financing. First, as with other ESAF funding, interested creditor countries would lend to IMF the total value of loans to be issued from the window, receiving a non-concessional interest rate on their loans. Second, donors would provide a subsidy to ESAF to allow it to charge low interest rates; but the British proposal recognizes the severe constraints on aid budgets and thus suggests a phased sale of small amounts of the IMF's gold holdings. The profits (capital gain over SDRs (special drawing rights) 35 per ounce) could be placed in a new trust fund which would in turn invest in international financial instruments. The earnings of the trust fund would be used to pay the interest subsidy on the ESAF loans.

What matters in the end is not the details of the proposal, but the fact that the difficulty of multilateral debt servicing for some countries has been recognized by a major donor whose aid fatigue is a parliamentary fact of life (at least for economic as opposed to humanitarian aid). The proposal is under discussion in the Bretton Woods institutions where interest in it seems to be building.

The "Tobin tax" will not solve the financing problem

As donor-country aid budgets have been highly constrained in recent years, .0ine analysts have looked for alternate sources of funding for international cooperation via automatic international taxation mechanisms; but it is hard to believe that the same parliaments that deny funds for international cooperation through their budgets will agree to transfer potential taxing authority. The ability to collect some of the proposed taxes at low administrative cost is also unclear. The difficulties with the most prominent proposal in this category of revenue measures. the "Tobin tax", illustrate the difficulties.

The Tobin tax on foreign-exchange trading, a proposal aiming to "throw sand in the wheels of the market" and discourage speculation, fell into obscurity for over 15 years, until revived recently as a potential mechanism for raising funds for international purposes.n The efficacy of the proposal was always contested, but its capacity to solve important multilateral financing problems today is questionable. Professor James Tobin's idea was to impose a uniform ad valorem transaction tax on all spot sales and purchases of foreign exchange in all major foreign-exchange markets. The tax was to be small he used 1 per cent as an example but since it would be paid once as funds left and again as they returned home a short time later, this would have been enough to raise significantly the change in the exchange rate necessary to profit from the speculative transactions.

The proposal was made because speculators had been increasingly responding to emerging inconsistencies between monetary and exchange-rate policies and forcing the devaluation of pegged exchange rates. Professor Tobin's intention was not to provide a substitute for more consistent policy-making by the major-currency countries, but merely to enlarge the potential degree of inconsistency before speculators jumped in. In this regard, the aim was to reduce the volatility of the foreign-exchange market. The tax would have had to be uniform and be applied in all foreign-exchange markets to avoid shifting business to low-tax or untaxed markets.

When Professor Tobin proposed his tax in 1978, it appeared that the tax would be an administratively feasible proposition. It would have required an international agreement and the licensing of all foreign-exchange traders at the wholesale level so as to ensure that all trades were taxed. As the market was mainly a banking market, most participants were already under supervision, although offshore centres would also have had to be brought into the agreement. Nevertheless, the proposal did not win broad support in the economics profession because its effectiveness in stemming exchange-rate volatility was not assured even in theory, while its distorting effect on resource allocation was c1ear.34

Today, making the proposal work, especially in the major industrialized countries, seems a more difficult challenge, mainly owing to the development of the market in financial derivatives. Now, foreign-exchange speculators need never deal in the actual spot market for foreign exchange. It should be possible to tax derivatives trading too, but this adds an extra dimension to the cost of administering the tax. Moreover, even in the "halcyon days" of the 1960s, transnational corporations speculated without explicitly buying or selling additional amounts of foreign exchange by simply advancing or delaying their normal foreign-exchange purchases, financing the difference in payment timing with local credit. Firms could still use intra-affiliate transactions to evade the tax.

To sum up the argument to this point, today's foreign-exchange market at least for the major currencies is a highly complex and interrelated set of markets for spot and forward currency, plus futures, swaps and other derivative contracts. One can imagine a transaction tax imposed on some or all segments of the market, although it would be a "leaky-bucket" tax, with new holes opening as the tax authorities plugged each of the holes it found. Moreover, no one has claimed that the tax would discourage any serious speculative run on a currency, only that it would eliminate the profits of speculation on relatively small changes in exchange rates. Would the tax be worth the effort? Probably not.

The Tobin tax sought, in essence, to reverse the falling cost of international financial transactions owing to technical change and liberalization of exchange control. In this regard, it was a kind of Luddite proposal and the "sand in the wheels" metaphor seems evocative. Yet, the idea has been echoed by proposals to establish or raise security transfer excise taxes (STETs) so as to reduce volatility in financial markets in the United States. In each case, the aim was to "merely return direct unit transactions costs to around their late 1970s level". These proposals also seem to reflect the suspicion that speculative activities and the financial sector in general are of less worth to society than physical production and should be discouraged. If that is the case, it seems arbitrary to single out foreign-exchange speculation.

There is, in any case, a simpler way to "fight" speculation (if that is the villain) and it need not involve singling out foreign-exchange trading: tax the profits from speculation at a higher rate than other profits.36 In the United States, for example, short-term capital gains are already taxed at a higher rate than longterm gains. Governments could also discourage speculation by not allowing losses from the targeted activities to be deducted from earned income (for example, on assets turned over within a stated short period), while taxing the gains heavily. Also, any one country could decide to tax speculation more heavily than some other country. The tax mte would not have to be harmonized, although the standard mechanisms of international coordination would still be needed to fight tax evasion and curtail double taxation of the same income. If enough countries decided to heavily tax speculation on the consolidated, worldwide income of their taxpayers, it could reduce the speculative flows and raise tax revenue.

Anyway, such income taxation would not help raise funds automatically for international official activities, but that was not ever going to happen with a Tobin tax either. The more recent interest in the proposal apparently identified foreign-exchange trading as an activity on which the international community could assert a financial claim. However, it seems more realistic to view the foreign-exchange market as just one of many financial markets. The national (and local) authorities where the exchange is located are the ones that would seek to retain whatever revenue a tax on that activity generated. This did not matter in the original proposal, as the focus was on trying to stem speculation; indeed. the use of the tax revenue received little, if any, attention.

In sum, although funding international cooperation on a more automatic and stable basis would be highly desirable, taxing foreign-exchange transactions would be inefficient and ultimately ineffective. Moreover, a basic principle of public finance calls for transparency and explicit consideration by representatives of the public before public moneys are committed. The challenge that proponents of development cooperation have to face is making the case to parliaments that the expenditures are warranted. It might help the argument if development cooperation were viewed in a new way.

Towards a new model of development cooperation

In July 1994 in the midst of widespread discussion on the past and future of multilateral cooperation occasioned by the fiftieth anniversary of the Bretton Woods system, the World Bank issued a new "mission statement" to explain itself better to the global development community"? It acknowledged that its own Operations Evaluation Department had found that many Bank-financed operations were less than effective (p. 16). It also noted that the volume of World Bank lending had levelled off in real terms in the 1980s, although this was attributable to a number of factors, including distorted policy environments that limited creditworthiness in some borrowers and increased access to private capital in others and the regional development banks' also increasing their lending capacity in many countries (p. 14).

The Bank then committed itself to becoming a new institution for a new world. It would build upon and enhance its two main roles: financial and advisory (p. 27). It would dedicate itself to "five major challenges": pursuing economic reforms to enhance growth and reduce poverty, investing in people, protecting the environment, stimulating the private sector and reorienting government (p. 18). It would do this by following "six guiding principles", namely, increasing the selectivity or its activities, strengthening its partnerships with others, emphasizing its client orientation, increasing its results orientation, ensuring cost effectiveness, and maintaining its strong commitment to financial integrity (p. 27).

To get better results in the field, in other words, projects that are fully implemented and maintained, the Bank wants to involve borrower Governments and users more than in the past. This constitutes an allusion to what has come to be called the "ownership problem": if people do not feel part of a project they will not use and maintain it properly. As the mission statement indicates, the "eventual aim must be to enhance the participation of the poor in the design and implementation of Bank-financed projects and programmes" (p.29). A related commitment is the Bank's new "client orientation", which "implies listening more to borrowers and other relevant parties and learning from them" (p. 29).

The crux of the problem that the Bank is seeking to address seems to be that the more successful developing countries now have additional financing options and are increasingly going elsewhere, while the less successful ones do not yet represent very bright prospects for private finance. The more successful countries can unbundle the Bank's package of finance and advice on policies. As the Bank said, "Many borrowers are also rapidly developing their own analytical capacities and using the resources of a wide range of other development agencies, official and unofficial" (p. 7).

These considerations and parallel ones in DAC and in national Governments reflect efforts to come to grips with a very major challenge to ODA. The facts are that budgetary support of donor Governments for ODA has been significantly weakened and the multilateral development banks have seen their role in development questioned by their supporters and allies. It seems, however, that what has become vulnerable is not support for international cooperation per se, but cooperation under the post-war model of assistance.

The essence of that model of cooperation was that the developing countries lacked finance and that the donors knew something that the recipients did not.n A donor would impart its knowledge and financing in a manner that the donor generally chose, controlled and audited. Today donors ask how more effective approaches can be designed that while involving international financial cooperation are "locally owned". If anything, however, the economic adjustment experiences described above in chapter V seem to demonstrate that the programmes and projects have to be locally generated as well. The point is that after two, three, or more decades, the model whereby the North "assists" the South to develop through ODA programmes and projects including those of multilateral institutions has to be deeply re-examined.

As a result, a new model might be articulated, one in which financial assistance is provided by Governments as part of agreed international programmes to advance a concrete collective goal, whether it be eradicating a disease from the planet (acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) is a case in point), combating environmental warming or ozone depletion in the atmosphere, or developing a new "green revolution" for Africa (see box VII.2).

ODA might also finance technical assistance that is more in the nature of sharing experiences than of teaching "advanced-countryexpertise to lagging nations. Sharing experiences, whether on policies to tame speculative financial flows or processes that foster the flow of information about international trade opportunities, can e% en be politically popular. In all such cases, the model of ODA is of a joint effort of countries that come to the table to tackle a commonly perceived problem. Even if only some are in a position to bring money, all have something to contribute and have a stake in the solution of the problem.

If this view is correct, then multilateral cooperation for development in particular will come to look quite different as the twenty-first century progresses. Activities closer in approach to the Global Environment Facility might burgeon while the more traditional multilateral development assistance could shrink, although not necessarily disappear, especially as concerns humanitarian assistance and concessional lending programmes.

The following draws heavily on Cristian Ossa and Barry Herman, 'On multilateral cooperation for development views on the eve of the Halifax Summit', paper presented to the Seminar on Development and Global Governance, North-South Institute and International Development Research Centre, Ottawa, 2 May 1995

Food production per person in Africa has been declining since the early 1970s. While Asia and Latin America have seen large gains in the production of rice and wheat since the mid-1960s as a result of the increased use of new high-yield varieties. Africa has hardly benefited from the Green Revolution. This can be largely attributed to a lack of seeds suitable to African conditions, weak local research capacity arid a poorly developed support system to encourage adoption. Additional research specifically designed for application to African conditions is urgently needed and new funds for such research could be raised from the revenue potential of the property rights of germplasm collections that were recently placed under the auspices of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO).

Lack of suitable improved seeds

The green revolution in Asia was made possible by the development of high-yielding varieties of wheat and rice that responded very well to fertilizers and controlled water management. These varieties are, however, not very suitable for conditions in Africa, namely, its climate ((or example, variability of rain), soil and plant diseases. While about 5 per cent of total arable land is currently irrigated in Africa compared with one third in Asia the potential for further irrigation is limited for technical and economic reasons.' Since the early 1960s, the share of rice and wheat in total food production has remained at only about 6 per cent again, compared with one third in Asia.'

Even where irrigation has been available, the new varieties could not be easily transferred from Asia to Africa without significant yield loss. Agricultural technology is highly location-specific and needs a local research and development capacity for a transfer to be successful. The public and private research capacity in Africa has been rather weak, lacking a critical mass, and biased towards export crops.' This also explains in part why there has not been a technological breakthrough in the development of other crops more apt for African conditions, neither for rain-fed coarse-grain cultivation in semi-arid zones, nor for the traditional roots and tubers typical of subsistence agriculture in the more humid regions of Africa. Maize in eastern Africa, particularly in Kenya and Zimbabwe, is the only food crop for which new hybrid seeds have been adopted by farmers to any considerable degree. There has also been some progress recently in the development of high-yielding cassava, but it has yet to be widely adopted by farmers. d

The experience with maize in Kenya and Zimbabwe shows that the development of local research capacity yields results. The development and adoption of maize hybrids benefited from the commercialized farming sector, which pressured for the development of a local research capacity. The farming sector also benefited from an extensive transportation network, well-developed extension and credit systems and a local seed industry. Indeed, Zimbabwe was the second country, after the United States, to develop maize hybrids.

Where new technology is available, adoption is often slow

Spreading advanced techniques to the farming community in sub-Saharan Africa entails reaching the low-income farmers, particularly smallholders. About 60 per cent of the rural population lives in poverty and when subsistence in the short-term is at stake, farmers are risk-averse. In such a situation, the adoption of a new technology will be slow unless it is clearly recognizable as superior to, that is as cheaper than, the traditional one, and has a lower yield-variance and a lower risk of failure. However, hybrid varieties need complementary inputs: not only do they have a higher yield but they might also have a higher variance of yield and a higher susceptibility to pests and be more prone to drought.' Smallholders also often operate under seasonal labour constraints that hinder the adoption of new techniques requiring additional work during the busy season.

Most important, the slow rate of adoption of new seed varieties by smallholders is due to the lack of reliable seedand fertilizer-delivery systems, infrastructure, extension

About 75 per cent of all modern and large-scale irrigation in Africa is in Egypt and the Sudan, while about 80 per cent of traditional and small-scale imgation in Africa is in Madagascar, Nigeria and North Attica. The potential for further irrigation development in northern Africa is small. There is, however, a limited but important and yet largely untapped potential for small-scale irrigation schemes 'FAO. African Agriculture. The Next 25 Years (Rome, FAO. 1986), annex IV, pp. 59-61), services and other inputs, as well as inadequate credit. The provision of these items is often biased against smallholders. For instance, it has been observed that in Malawi, smallholders have a preference for flint maize over high-yielding hybrids owing to their poverty, and lack of credit, seeds, extension services and fertilizer, as well as to their taste preferences plus the processing and storability characteristics of the traditional varieties.'

Need for research on suitable technology

In the light of Africa's food situation, research should focus on the development of drought-resistant, low-risk and low-cost seed varieties for rain-fed agriculture that do not need many external inputs. In this regard, the potential of biotechnology involving genetic manipulation is momentous. Biotechnology enables the adaptation of seeds to fit the environment instead of adapting the environment to the needs of the new seeds, as was the case with the green revolution in the 1960s and 1970s when the development of irrigation systems and use of chemicals accompanied the adoption of new seeds. With biotechnology, seeds can be developed that better resist drought and disease and are less dependent on fertilizer. So far, however, progress has been rather slow even for the crops that research has concentrated on, let alone for African food crops.

The question is how research can be reoriented towards the typical African food crops and crops suitable for African conditions. There are basically three sites of research: major corporations. and domestic and international research centres. Most African food crops, such as sorghum. millet, cassava. yams and pulses, are neither consumed, nor grown in developed countries, and only a small fraction are exported. Commercial interest at the international level in research and development of the typical African food crops is therefore small. In effect, the public sector has to play a catalysing role.

Domestic research capacity in Africa is itself too weak to generate a new green revolution. This capacity needs to be strengthened, not only for the purpose of participating in some of the new research, but because it will remain essential to adapt new technologies to local conditions and to help close large gaps between the yields on farms and those on experiment stations.g

It thus seems that the basic research thrust has to fall to the network of international agricultural research centres (IARCs). The green revolution of the 1960s and 1970s was almost completely a product of international public research, in particular at the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI) and the Centro Internacional de Mejoramiento de Maiz y Trigo (CIMMYT) (International Centre for Maize and Wheat Improvement). In recent years, however, funding has declined for the central network of international agricultural research centres that were brought together under the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR) in 1971!' Funds for the core programme of CGIAR fell from $275 million in 1990 to $215 million in 1994. In real terms the funds for 1994 were equal to the amount available in 1979, while six additional IARCs have been brought under the CGIAR umbrella since then. Moreover, there is a growing gap between the donor-approved research agenda and the disbursement of funds.

The decline in international public funding for agricultural research is part of an overall shifting of research expenditure to the private sector. This trend is most extreme for biotechnology where research is concentrated in large corporations of the developed countries that can mobilize the required resources! Only about 10 developing countries none in Africa have any capacity to undertake biotechnological research.

Even within the private sector, research activity has become increasingly concentrated, in part as a result of the extremely high cost of design and development of a new biotechnological product. This has prompted corporate mergers, take-overs, joint ventures and the proliferation of public-private linkages Thus, public institutions and universities have focused more on basic research that is partly financed by private firms receiving the patent rights, developing and marketing the product, and collecting royalties.

Property rights

The trend towards the privatization of agricultural research has been driven in part by the strengthening of the protection of intellectual property rights under patents and plant breeder's rights, which have increasingly included living materials!' but there also exists a danger. Private research entails secrecy and inhibits free dissemination of knowledge, in contrast to the openness and widespread distribution of the results of the green revolution in the 1960s. On the other hand, the wider protection of intellectual property rights might encourage the spreading of new products by the patent holder through exports at prices that include royalties.

While the property rights in research outputs have been increasingly protected, rights of the providers of the natural inputs to the research have not been recognized under any current property-rights system. Much of the raw material used for agricultural research, the world's germplasm, has been freely available in the developing countries or through the genebanks of the IARCs. There are even cases in which patents have been applied for or granted to private companies that added little research to what had been undertaken by IARCs or learned by farmers over the years. In such cases, it is possible that farmers might end up paying royalties for use of products whose development was largely based on their own resources and knowledge.'

To counterbalance this asymmetry, the concept of farmers' rights has been developed and endorsed by more than 160 countries in FAO Conference resolutions. The intention is to reward farmers for their efforts in conserving and improving genetic diversity and to allow farmers to benefit from the improved use of plant genetic resources through plant breeding and other scientific methods.' For this purpose, an international fund for plant genetic resources will be set up to support plant genetic conservation, management and utilization programmes, particularly in developing countries. According to the resolutions, several areas deserve special priority, including the improvement of plant breeding and seed production. A number of issues regarding this fund, however, need to be resolved. Among them are its resources and how benefits would be transferred to farmers!

One source of finance for the fund might be revenues from property rights in the germplasm collections of the IARCs. In October 1994 an agreement was signed by the IARCs to place all their genebanks (some 500,000 plant varieties with a large share being unique samples) under the auspices of FAO. Under the agreement, germplasm is to be kept in trust by the IARCs for the benefit of humanity, in particular the people of the developing countries. IARCs agreed not to claim legal ownership nor intellectual property rights. Samples are to be available "without restriction". Material transfer agreements would allow revenues to be collected, while restricting the recipient from seeking patents. These agreements would generally involve, inter alia, an initial payment from the recipient of the germplasm and an agreement on additional payments if the germplasm is commercialized by the recipient. Perhaps $100 million per year might be mobilized for the fund in this way

Funding a green revolution for Africa

These developments the lack of commercial interest in African food crops, the concentration of research in large corporations and the increasing possibilities for acquiring patents on seeds raise fears that Africa might never see a green revolution. Earnings from the genebanks might well aid farmers through their being applied to supporting research on seed varieties suitable for African conditions and to helping strengthen research capacity in Africa.

However, resources may not be generated by the genebanks for several years and even then may build up only slowly. Research activities warrant increased support today as well as in the future and thus there seems no escaping the appropriateness and desirability of increased international public support for agricultural research at this time. In the context of donor-country budgets, or even in the context of budgets for ODA, relatively small amounts of funds, which might later be replaced at least in part by earnings from the genebanks, could have very large payoffs in an area that constitutes an important human priority.


Recent United Nations population projections highlight three particularly significant developments in international population dynamics that are emerging in the 19909.1 The first is the slower than anticipated rate of growth of world population, which the Population Division of the Department for Economic and Social Information and Policy Analysis of the United Nations Secretariat believes represents an acceleration of the long-term demographic transition from a high rate to a low rate of global population growth. Another concerns the growing effect of the spread of the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS): the disease has become so prevalent in the heavily impacted countries as to affect national rates of mortality. As the effect is anticipated to worsen over time, it is expected to retard the long-term transition to a low level of mortality in these countries. A third development that is probably more transitory is the sharp deceleration in population growth in "eastern Europe".2 Indeed, there was an actual decline in population in several countries in the past five years. This has been the result of fertility decline, rising mortality and net out-migration of population in response to the unsettled conditions that accompanied radical political changes and the ongoing economic transition from centrally planned to market economies.

 POPULATION GROWTH

The rate of world population growth slowed significantly in the first half of the 1990s: world population is estimated to have increased at 1.57 per cent annually between 1990 and 1995 compared to 1.73 per cent a year in the past decade and a half (see table VIII.1). The current growth rate is the lowest recorded since the Second World War and marks the resumption of the declining trend that prevailed from the mid-1960s to the mid-1970s. The decline in the rate of growth in the first half of the 1990s reflects, on the one hand, the onset of slower population growth in many countries that previously had persistently high fertility and, on the other hand, a continuing or accelerating decline in population growth in other countries, including those that had fertility reduction policies in place.

United Nations projections indicate that the growth of world population will continue to slow steadily, falling to less than 1.0 per cent a year during 20202030. Consequently, world population is projected to increase from an estimated 5.72 billion in 1995 to 8.29 billion in 2025. World population is projected to continue growing after that, albeit by gradually slowing rates, reaching almost 10 billion people by 2050. World population will still be growing at that point, if only by 0.5 per cent a year.3

The important trend in population dynamics underlying the slower world population growth rate is the greater decline of world fertility. The world fertility rate declined by 13 per cent in the decade 1980-1985 to 1990-1995, to 3.1 births per woman (see table VIII.3).

The decline was more pronounced in the less developed regions (16 per (.ent) where fertility has remained relatively high. In those regions, the greatest decline was experienced in the countries of East and South-East Asia. particularly China, as well as Central and South America and Northern Africa.

Among the regions where fertility decline has been slower, that is, subSaharan Africa and South and West Asia, there are indications that the decline is nevertheless becoming more broad-based and sustained. Some countries in subSaharan Africa appear to have begun the transition to fertility decline. These include Madagascar, Rwanda, the United Republic of Tanzania, Namibia, South Africa and Mauritania. Fertility decline in others, such as the Gambia. Zambia and Zimbabwe. has accelerated while the trend towards lower fertility continued in countries where fertility declines had already been documented, such as Kenya and Botswana. In West and South Asia, the Islamic Republic of Iran is going through a rapid fertility transition, while past fertility declines are continuing in India and Nepal and accelerating in Bangladesh.

The most important factor in these declines is the increase in the prevalence of contraceptive use. A higher age at marriage has also helped to lower fertility in some countries. These changes are, in turn, the result of population and health policies as Ise11 as the increasing education of women and other dimensions of social and economic development.

In the more developed regions, fertility decline was most pronounced in eastern and southern Europe. The decline in southern Europe is a continuation of a long-term trend, with the exception of Albania and the former Yugoslavia. In eastern Europe, in contrast, it can be directly linked to the political and socio-economic changes that began in the late 1980s (see below).
 AIDS AND MORTALITY RATES

Mortality is continuing a long-term decline in most countries, with the average life expectancy for the world as a whole estimated to be more than 64 years in 1990-1995, an increase of almost one and a half years over 19851990. In many countries of sub-Saharan Africa, however, this trend has been attenuated by the growing impact of AIDS. While rapid gains in life expectancy would have been anticipated through the beginning of the next century in the absence of AIDS, its growing impact is expected to result in stagnation, and even decline, in life expectancy. This will result in a widening of the gap in life expectancy between these countries and other less developed and more developed countries. In the 15 hardest-hit countries,6 it is estimated that the toll from AIDS reduced the life expectancy at birth by three years from the expected level in 1990-1995. It is currently only 50 years and is projected to remain at this level through 2005, having been diminished by almost eight years by the effect of AIDS. In contrast, the average life expectancy of all less developed countries is anticipated to increase from 62 years to 65 years from 1995 to 2005.

The rising death toll due to AIDS will impede the growth in the size of the population of these countries, although it will continue to be positive. In 1995, their population is 221 million, approximately 2 million or 1 per cent less than it would have been without AIDS (see table VIII.4). By the year 2005, their population is projected to be 292 million, about 12 million or almost 4 per cent less than would have been expected in the absence of AIDS. Furthermore, the population of the most severely impacted countries Uganda, Zambia and Zimbabwe will be 6 to 7 per cent lower than would have been anticipated without AIDS.


THE SITUATION IN TRANSITION ECONOMIES

The political and economic transformation of countries in eastern Europe has had a profound effect on the population dynamics of that region, including fertility, mortality and international migration. First, there was a sharp drop in fert ility. In contrast to the virtual absence of change from the first half of the 1980s to the second half, fertility in the 1990-1995 period was 23 per cent lower than in the 1985-1990 period. Because of the initially low levels of fertility, all the countries in the region, except Republic of Moldova, currently have total fertility rates that are below replacement level (about two children per woman). This sharp decline was widespread among the countries in the region.7

At the same time that fertility has declined, mortality has risen; average life expectancy at birth fell between 1985-1990 and 1990-1995. This deterioration was found only in the life expectancy of males as there has been slight improvements in female life expectancy. Although the decline in the life expectancy of men began in the early 1980s owing to an increase in death from cardiovascular diseases, death rates from other degenerative and infectious diseases and external causes, such as accidents and suicides, rose in the early 1990s.

The increase in international migration in the region has also been significant, as formerly centrally planned economies of eastern Europe and the successor States of the former Soviet Union liberalized their exit policies and ethnic conflict prompted international flows of population. The net out-migration from the countries of eastern Europe (excluding the states of the CIS) increased substantially, from 700,000 in 1985-1990 to 850,000 in 1990-1995, mostly destined for western Europe. There have been significant increases in migration among the european successor States of the former Soviet Union with net out-migration from Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia and net in-migration to the Russian Federation and Ukraine. The out-migration from the former group of States is primarily of ethnic Russians to the Russian Federation. Out-migration from the Russian Federation and the Ukraine is mainly to western Europe, Israel and the United States while in-migration is from other successor States.

Population dynamics in the Asian States of the CIS have also been significantly affected by the breakup of the former Soviet Union. However, population growth rates have remained strongly positive despite the acceleration of fertility decline after 1990 and net out-migration since 1985. This is because of the initial relatively high level of fertility and continued gains in life expectancy. Thus, the annual population growth rate from 1990 to 1995 in all but two of these States was more than 1 per cent, with the highest rate of growth reaching almost 3 per cent.


The World Economic Survey, the predecessor of the present publication, has assessed and analysed the socio-economic attainment of women and their contribution to economic development on several occasions.' With the approach of the Fourth World Conference on Women: Action for Equality, Development and Peace, which will take place in Beijing in September 1995, the status of women and their contribution to economic and social development are the centre of international discussion. The present chapter highlights certain major developments in the areas of education, training and labour markets.2

EDUCATION AND TRAINING

Education is one of the most important means for women to acquire knowledge and skills that will enable them to fully participate in the development process and improve upon their own and their families' living standards. Despite some progress, the gap between male and female educational attainment is still wide.

The estimated illiteracy rate of women aged 15 years or over has declined over the past decades in all developing regions as table IX.1 demonstrates. The female illiteracy rate fell to 15 per cent in Latin America, and the gap in relation to male illiteracy is relatively small. On the other hand, female illiteracy is significantly higher in Africa and in western and southern Asia than in Latin America and the difference between women and men still considerable.

Averages presented in table IX.1 conceal wide disparities, however, across countries, geographical areas and age groups. Usually, the higher the overall illiteracy rate in a country, the wider the disparity between female and male illiteracy rates. This can be seen in particular in figure IX.1 in which each point represents a country and the countries that are farther away from the origin (zero male and female illiteracy) tend to be farther above the "equality line", where male and female illiteracy rates are the same.

Illiteracy among older women tends to be higher than among younger women. In some countries, illiteracy rates among women of at least 25 years of age are more than twice as high as those among women ages 15-24. The older the women, the larger the difference. However, as figure IX.2 shows for a selection of countries for which adequate data were available, the countries with high illiteracy among women over 25 years of age also tend to show large drops in illiteracy among younger women, implying a considerable advance achieved in offering educational opportunities to women. This notwithstanding, in some countries illiteracy rates remained inordinately high among the younger age group.

Inequalities in access to education also exist between women living in urban areas and those in rural areas, with the latter usually showing much higher illiteracy rates, particularly in low and medium-income countries. Illiteracy rates in those countries tend to be higher among young women in rural areas than among those in the cities. The relatively small degree of political attention that distant, rural areas often receive from the central government is one of the factors underlying such a difference. Women in rural areas are also relatively disadvantaged in attaining literacy owing to stronger traditional and cultural attitudes in rural as compared with urban areas and the heavy demand for subsistence agricultural labour. While boys are sent to school, girls need to help their mothers take care of younger children, gather fuel and carry water.

Although adult illiteracy rates among females are still high in some regions, there has been progress in increasing the number of girls enrolled in primary and secondary schools. The combined primary plus secondary enrolment ratios presented in table IX.2 indicate improvements in overall female enrolment through the secondary level. The female gross enrolment ratio increased in most developing regions the exception being Oceania during the last decade, and in many instances at rates faster than those for men. Latin America and eastern. south-eastern and western Asia show comparable female and male enrolment ratios. In southern Asia, however, the gap remains wide despite the fact that female enrolment increased faster than male enrolment.

Notwithstanding the progress made, the number of countries where girls' combined primary and secondary enrolment ratio is equal to or greater than boys' is still limited. The number of countries reached 48 (out of the 118 countries for which data were available) in 1990 up from 37 in 1980 (see table IX.3). In several countries, enrolment ratios were reduced owing to a stagnation or decline in enrolment resulting from the deterioration of economic conditions and other adverse circumstances that had been experienced by these countries during the last decade.

Women are also increasing their presence in higher education, and in 1990 in some regions (eastern Europe, the developed countries outside western Europe, Latin America and the Caribbean and western Asia) they outnumbered men. In sub-Saharan Africa and southern Asia, however, they still lag behind, considerably as may be seen from table IX.4.

During the past 25 year, women's share in the labour force increased somewhat, with the exception of sub-Saharan Africa where it declined slightly, from ;9 per cent in 1970 to 38 per cent in 1990, and central Asia, where it declined also slightly, from 45 per cent in 1970 to 44 per cent in 1990. The most significant gains occurred in Latin America, the Caribbean, western Europe, southern Asia and north Africa (see table IX.5). The last, however, remains the region whose share was lowest, at 21 per cent in 1990.

The gender breakdown of the labour force is reflected in differences in economic activity rates between men and women, the rates for the latter being usually lower than those for the former.3 Men's activity rates exhibited little variation across regions, ranging from 75 per cent in eastern Europe to 87 per cent in sub-Saharan Africa in 1990. Women's participation rates, however, showed a much wider range: extending from 21 per cent in north Africa to 58 per cent in eastern Europe. Such divergences are partially explained by differences in cultural attitudes towards women working outside the home and, to a lesser extent, by the degree of economic development and the possibilities for wage employment in the countries concerned.

Over the past 25 years, the female participation rate has remained stable at about 57 per cent in eastern Europe, declined in sub-Saharan Africa and eastern Asia, and increased in all other regions (see table IX.6). Women's participation increased faster in the 1980s than in the 1970s in many regions. This might be explained by an increase in women-headed households, increasing the need of women to support their families; migration of men, leaving jobs for women; and a decline in fertility. On the other hand, stagnant and declining economies may explain why female participation in sub-Saharan Africa dropped from 57 per cent in 1970 to 53 per cent in 1990.


The distribution of the female labour force by kind of economic activity shows a pattern nondifferent from that of the male distribution. The female labour force tends to ha % e a high concentration in one sector, (except in eastern Asia where the distribution of the female labour force across sectors is more uniform). Women tend to predominate in services (developed countries, Latin America and the Caribbean, western Asia and Oceania) and in agriculture (sub-Saharan Africa and southern Asia) (see table 1X.7). Industry is the sector where women tend to be the least represented. The male labour force, on the other hand, predominates in industry.

Women's and men's occupations have always differed. Women are often found in occupations that are losing prestige, and therefore command less income, while occupations of higher status are dominated by men. Women are underrepresented in administrative, managerial, transport and production jobs., while they predominate in clerical, service and lower-level professional and technical occupations (see table IX.8).

Women face major obstacles when they attempt to translate their educational attainment into economic advancement. Trends in the teaching profession, for instance, clearly illustrate this fact. At earlier stages of economic development, men occupy the bulk of education occupations at all levels: but they advance as new and better-paid positions in the secondary and higher education levels are created. sliiic women occupy the vacated lower-paid jobs. The higher the educational level. the less frequent the presence of women among the teaching staff. In the developed countries, women represent about one fourth of all university professors but 75 per cent of all teachers at the primary level (see table IX.9).

Gender segregation exists with respect to the top and bottom of the occupational hierarchy and within job categories. Job segregation involves factors such as skill, responsibility, pay, status and power. Women have fewer educational opportunities than men to acquire the relevant skills to occupy better-paid jobs. Female-dominated jobs offer less advantages than male-dominated occupations in terms of pay, benefits, security of contract and opportunities for promotion.

In many countries, the male-female wage gap narrowed during the past decade; however, significant differences persist. In all of the countries included in figure IX.3, for example, women's pay in manufacturing was lower than men's. Differences can be significant, as in the case of Japan where women working in manufacturing typically earned only 40 per cent of the average man's salary in 1990. Women who work in manufacturing tend to be found in a limited number of industries, usually labour-intensive ones (for example, the garment and food processing industries). Moreover, they frequently have jobs that have low occupational status: 67 per cent of them are characterized as workers, while only 5 per cent occupy professional-technical positions. Less than 2 per cent of women in manufacturing carry out administrative-managerial functions.'

Another important factor explaining the lower level of women's earnings is part-time work. Women are much more likely than men to work part time. Part-time occupations, however, usually demand less skill and command lower pay and benefits than full-time jobs. Other factors include legal bathers and family roles.

A considerable share of the labour force of developing countries' is engaged in work in the informal sector. In the African countries for which information is available, with the exception of Egypt, about one third or more than of the female non-agricultural labour force works in the informal sector. In some African countries, the informal sector is the major employer, absorbing more than 50 per cent of the female labour force. Although the relative importance of the informal sector as a source of employment is smaller in other developing regions, the sector employs a considerable share of the non-agricultural labour force in these regions as well (see table IX.10). The fact that, with some exceptions, women's presence in the sector is greater than men's is an indication of the difficulties that women face in finding jobs in the formal sector. Additionally, incomes generated in the informal sector are usually lower and more insecure than those in the formal sector.


Following the collapse of oil prices in 1986 and except for a short period of time in 1990, oil prices fluctuated within a range of $16 to $20 a barre1.1 Over the past few years, however, oil prices moved to a lower range of $13 to $18 a barrel. The current range appears to reflect a level that permits most established oil producers to remain profitable for many years to come, although more and more small marginal oil producers, particularly in the United States of America, may he squeezed out of business. Reduction in exploration and development costs, combined with deregulation, privatization and the opening up of energy markets in a number of oil-producing countries, have led to this new situation. In the meantime, die influence on the market of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) seems to have weakened considerably and its ability to affect prices appears to have declined. Nevertheless, OPEC remains a major factor in the world oil market and it will likely he a growing factor in the medium run as world demand strengthens.

CHARACTERISTICS OF THE OIL MARKET TODAY

With the expansion of spot and futures markets for varieties of crude oil, oil prices have begun to behave more like other commodity prices. The prices of most varieties of crude oil tend to follow the prices of certain heavily traded benchmark crudes. most notably Brent and West Texas Intermediate. The growing depth of futures trading has brought more transparency to the petroleum market in the sense that the oil sector now reacts more quickly to shifts in supply or demand. However, often because of the eagerness of traders to make quick profits, rumours or speculation influence oil trading in a way that sometimes obscures the fundamentals.

It seems, however, that while the development of such markets has engendered more short-term volatility in normal times than in earlier years, it has also tended to mitigate, rather than amplify the effect of sudden major supply shortfalls. This was demonstrated, for example, by the reaction of the oil market during the Gulf war of 1990/91, when oil prices rose sharply in the early months of the invasion, but quickly fell back and remained low in the middle of' the crisis once uncertainties were reduced over the ability of Iraq to inflict damage to Saudi oil facilities. Oil prices remained low and fell further every year since then in spite of the continuing embargo on Iraqi oil and the reduced oil exports from the former Soviet Union.

Many oil analysts take these developments to mean that oil prices are progressively being determined by market fundamentals rather than by OPEC. Indeed, additional non-OPEC supplies have lowered the demand for OPEC oil.

Oil prices refer to the average spot prices of the OPEC basket of seven crude oils.

 


Reluctant to play the role of the residual supplier and unwilling to give up market share, OPEC members have often continued to produce at levels close to their quotas, creating an oversupply. As the oil market reacts to the oversupply, prices and revenues begin to fall, leading producers to produce even more in order to meet revenue targets despite the fall in prices. This exacerbates the oversupply and exerts further downward pressure on prices. In this scenario, the downward trend of prices will be reversed only when OPEC curtails output significantly or when demand for its oil rises considerably.

Yet, if one were to conclude that OPEC is no longer as potent as it once was, it still would not follow that the present level of oil prices was the result of supply and demand in a competitive market. A truly competitive market would push prices significantly lower than they have been. In a competitive market, the price of exhaustible resources is determined by the marginal extraction cost, which at current world production volumes is at least one third less than the prices of today (see discussion of the oil-supply curve below). Thus, while OPEC may have less control of prices, it would be wrong to consider OPEC irrelevant to the formation of world oil prices. It is still the only force keeping prices high enough to allow partial replacement of depleting reserves in relatively high-cost areas, such as the United States.2

In fact, OPEC has accounted for an increasing share of world oil production, especially since 1986. Lower oil prices, combined with a mature and depleting reserve base in long-established producers, have accelerated production declines, particularly in the United States. Also, because of reduced investment and poor maintenance of oil facilities, oil production in the Russian Federation has declined by 5 million barrels per day (mbd) since 1988. This loss of output is larger than the total production of any country in the world other than Saudi Arabia and the United States. This fall, combined with the decline of oil production in the United States, more than offset the remarkable rise of output in the North Sea and in a number of non-OPEC developing countries, most notably, Colombia, Malaysia, Oman, the Syrian Arab Republic and Yemen. As a result, total non-OPEC production declined slightly but steadily until 1993.

Nevertheless, total non-OPEC supply rose in 1994 and is expected to continue to rise over the rest of the present decade. The volume of oil output in the States of the former Soviet Union remains very uncertain, but it is likely to fall further before it recovers in the second half of the 1990s. By contrast, oil output in the North Sea and Canada is likely to keep rising over the next several years. Production in Mexico and China will also likely rise, but the extent of the increase will depend on the level of investment in the expansion of new production capacity. Production in Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, Oman, Papua New Guinea, the Syrian Arab Republic, Viet Nam and Yemen will continue rising as well, while production in many other countries in Africa will depend on the extent of participation of foreign oil companies in exploration and development.

What this means is that while increased world oil consumption will ultimately again have to be increasingly supplied from OPEC reserves, it will also be met by gradually rising supplies from a number of non-OPEC oil producing countries. At present, OPEC production capacity is estimated at about 30 mbd, but estimates of capacity by the year 2000 range from 34 mbd to 40 mbd, depending on the level of capacity to be kept in reserve. Expansion of capacity by such magnitudes will require large investments probably exceeding 840 billions which many OPEC members could only finance in conjunction with investment hv foreign oil companies. Given the experience of the recent past, however, expansion of capacity may not be synchronized with growth in demand and there are likely to be periods of oversupply and undersupply. leading to price volatility. But ultimately, the very ample and low-cost reserves from the Middle East will undoubtedly be turned into producing capacity.

In 1950, world reserves were estimated at only 76 billion barrels of crude oil. They rose to 640 billion barrels by the end of 1979 and to 1,000 billion barrels by the end of 1994 (see table X.1). Estimates of probable additions to reserves vary widely, but a conservative estimate would be in the range of 500 billion to 1,000 billion barrels. Most importantly, more than three quarters of the present proved world oil reserves are in OPEC countries and about two thirds are located in five Middle East countries: the Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates. The latter countries are doubly blessed because they also enjoy the lowest production costs. At current production levels, the reserve-to-production ratio, an index usually used to approximate the life expectancy of reserves, stands at 84 years for OPEC and at only 18 years for nonOPEC countries. In the Middle East, the reserve-to-production ratio is 97 years. In the United States, by contrast, the ratio is only 9.5 years.

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF ADVANCES IN TECHNOLOGY

In recent years. the international oil industry has maintained a large profit margin, particularly upstream outside the United States, and avoided a precipitous decline in output despite the sharp decline in oil prices. The key factors behind this sustained profitability are a reduction in operating costs and gains in efficiency and productivity brought about by a rapid transfer and application of new technology throughout all sectors of the petroleum industry. The impact of technological innovations on the reserve base and on the overall cost of oil production has been substantial. Thanks to technological advance, oil can now be located more accurate!) and produced more efficiently than ever before. Innovative engineering and better understanding of earth science are yielding gains that even a few years ago could hardly be contemplated. Major oil companies are continuously relying on breakthroughs in technology that enable a better evaluation of oilfields and that locate potential deposits more accurately, driving down the cost of production from new oilfields.

The Falling Cost of Finding Oil

In 1986, OPEC attempted to regain the market share that it had been losing to other producers. As a result, oil prices fell by one half and an adjustment programme was set in motion that led the oil industry to drastically cut production costs. The degree of adjustment is not easily measured internationally, but the magnitude of the change seems to be well illustrated by the behaviour of operating costs in the domestic oilfields of the United States, as shown in figure X.1. The steep fall of oil prices in 1986 forced oil producers to re-evaluate their operations and to reposition for the future. Virtually all oil companies that are in business today have gone through intense periods of restructuring involving cost cutting. A significant part of the decline in production costs is the result of improvement in productive capacity brought about by rapid progress in petroleum technology. A large portion of the decline is also attributed to lower production taxes and royalty payments and to substantial reductions in the workforce, ranging from 20 to 40 per cent. In the United States, for example, employment in the upstream sector of the petroleum industry declined by 40 per cent between 1985 and 1992.4

The impact of technology has been substantial, particularly in reducing exploration and production costs. While petroleum technologies have been progressing ever since the first oil well was drilled in 1861, their impact has been particularly pronounced in the past several years because of rapid advances in computers. Exploration and development expenditures of international oil companies are at less than their level of the early 1980s. Oil companies are drilling fewer wells to find and produce oil than they did just a few years ago. Yet, many of these companies have managed to maintain and even improve their oil reserves position. Advances in technology have not only reduced exploration and development costs and improved efficiency and productivity, they have also led to more oil discoveries. Companies have also redirected their activities toward exploration and development in lower-risk areas. The result has been the growth in world oil reserves noted above.


 The kind of petroleum-engineering techniques that have revolutionized the oil industry in recent years include: three-dimensional (3 D) seismic surveys, remote sensing, horizontal drilling, slimhole drilling, measurements while drilling (MWD), tension-leg platforms (TLP), reservoir modelling and better understanding of fluid-rock interactions. Many of these technological innovations, which have been in progress for quite some time, have come at a time of rapid advances in computers, without which many of these advances would not have been possible.

The principal tool that enables petroleum geologists to locate hydrocarbon prospects is the seismic survey. Recent developments in this area include threedimensional (3 D) seismic surveys. The impact of 3 D seismic acquisition, processing and interpreting techniques in reducing drilling risk and in improving the discovery rate of new reserve additions has been phenomenal. The overall drilling cost is reduced by cutting the number of dry holes drilled. As a result, the oil discovery rate doubled in the United States between 1986 and 1990 and increased, on average, by nearly five times outside the United States (see figure X.2).5,6 Three-dimensional seismic surveys acquire and process a large volume of subsurface data and provide a clearer view and more detailed description of the underground reservoir formation.

Prior to the emergence of this new wave of technological innovation, companies had to drill 10 or more exploration wells before any significant oil discovery was found. Today, the combined use of 3 D and powerful computers for processing and interpretation of the data collected are minimizing the exploration risk, as operators have a better understanding of the subsurface geology before deciding where to drill. The average success ratio of drilling in new exploration areas is currently about 1 in 6 exploration wells (referred to as wildcat wells). In the North Sea, on average, one exploration well in every four leads to a significant discovery.

The discovery rate is an index usually used to indicate the amount of oil discovered per unit of drilling (e.g., barrels per foot drilled or barrels per well). Because reserve additions can result from revisions of existing reserves in known fields as well as from the discovery of new fields, this index can sometimes be invalid in reflecting the true returns to drilling, particularly in already explored areas. In addition, the amount of new reserves often remain unknown for years after initial discovery. The rapid rise in the discovery rate outside the United States shown in figure X.2 reflects, to a large extent, additional reserves in several OPEC countries owing to an upward revision of reserves in existing fields, particularly after 1987.

Better exploration techniques have enabled oil companies to more than double the amount of oil discovered for each exploration well drilled since 1986. Horizontal wells have also reduced production costs in many oilfields by more than 50 per cent. New exploration techniques have led to a reduction in the costs of seismic acquisition from more than $900 per kilometre in 1970 to less than $200 per kilometre in 1990.7 Better drilling techniques have allowed oil companies to increase the average drilling rate from 42 metres per day per rig (mid/rig) in 1985 to more than 100 m/d/rig in 1990.g The combination of threedimensional modelling and horizontal drilling resulted in drilling fewer exploration wells without compromising the quality of exploration. Technology is also helping companies extend the life expectancy of older oilfields and develop oil from areas once considered inaccessible and from small oil accumulations thought uneconomic to exploit.

One consequence is that oil production in the North Sea, which was expected to fall steadily a decade ago, is now at a record high. In the North Sea, the average capital cost of developing an oilfield has fallen by nearly one third over the past 10 years. As a result, many oilfields, which were considered uneconomic to develop as recently as a decade ago, are today being developed on the basis of oil prices of less than $10 a barrel. The restoration of profitability in many projects was also helped by the reduction in taxes. Nowhere is this more evident than in the Norwegian sector, where oil production has grown nearly fourfold over the past 10 years.

Refocusing of activities in large oil companies

Sustained profitability and higher productivity came about not only as a result of advances in technology and a reduction in the workforce, but also as a result of improved management and business practices. In a market place that is inherently volatile, most successful oil companies have reduced their bureaucracy and simplified management structures. Many firms also ceased operations or were merged

A number of oil companies have also divested non-core assets and focused on fundamental that is, oil-related activities where they have competitive advantage through established infrastructures and technical expertise." This strategy is very different from that of the 1970s and early 1980s, where major international oil companies acquired non-oil assets and diversified their business operations and activities.

At the same time, oil companies have begun to rely more on cooperation within their own organizations and with major participants in the oil market. Today, the trend in management is towards a growing use of multidisciplinary; team-based work with an emphasis on achieving performance targets and delivering value without unnecessary bureaucratic interference. Many oil companies have developed closer relationships with contractors and service companies to lower costs through innovative contractual and management arrangements. Some have also formed partnerships and established common services with other oil companies to share risks and improve the prospects of exploration and development activities.

 In 1991. the Independent Petroleum Association of America (IPAA) had 8,000 member companies, by comparison. in 1985, it had 15.000 companies.

The economist's supply curve is a hypothetical construction that shows how much of a product would be offered for sale at different prices by the sum of all producers. Such a supply curve can be derived for the world oil industry today based on data on crude oil production capacity and marginal production costs in different parts of the world (see table X.2). It is a rough approximation, but figure X.3 shows just such an oil supply curve. The data on production costs are only rough estimates based on a variety of industry sources. They include initial investment outlays or development costs as well as operating costs of current capacity. Because of the high element of inaccuracy of data on reserve additions from discoveries and development, few attempts have been made to estimate the true marginal costs and even fewer attempts have been made to estimate supply curves!'

The main conclusion that can be drawn from the figure is that even at today's prices. a considerable amount of oil can still be produced with a large margin of profit. That is, at the 1994 average price of $15.6 per barrel, world demand could have been met using oil that costs at most $10 per barrel. Of course, 1994 oil demand was not met only from the lowest cost suppliers, as the market does not work that efficiently. Rather, OPEC withholds enough of the low-cost supply so that some higher-cost producers could still remain in business when the price of oil was almost $16 per barrel.

Without OPEC output restraint, the price of oil could fall to $10 a barrel without reducing production required to meet current world oil demand of 68 mbd. Of course. if the oil price fell to such a level, demand would increase and the -equilibrium" output would be higher. If the demand were to rise above 72 mbd, however, the incremental supply could cost as much as $15 per barrel. Moreover, because of the high level of utilization of existing production capacity, a large supply disruption could cause prices to rise sharply given the steepness of the supply curve at current output, the only counter to the price pressure being the expeditious release of the emergency stockpile.

The technological frontier and future oil supply

While the supply curve shows output possibilities at the current time, the entire curve can be thought of as having been lowered and displaced to the right from its position 10 years before. Further advances in technology would move the curve further to the right.

There are several potential sources of such a move. Offshore oil production is one. It has grown from almost nothing in the early 1960s to nearly one third of world oil production at the present time. Twenty years ago, offshore oil production was confined to water depths of less than 200 metres. At present, oil can be produced from subsea fields at depths of some 1,000 metres of water. This is opening up new frontier areas such as in the Gulf of Mexico and the Campos Basin offshore Brazil.t2 Until recently, most of the offshore oil platforms were placed on top of a set of very large concrete blocks and steel structures fixed to the ocean floor. But the volume and weight of these Large-diameter legs were neither economic nor technically practical for use in deep waters (i.e., depths of more than 1,000 feet, or 300 metres). Deepwater exploration and development have gained momentum in recent years thanks to advances in subsea and floating production systems and especially tension-leg platforms (TLP). Tension-leg platforms, which can be anchored at depths of more than 1,000 metres of water, have begun to allow companies to venture into progressively deeper waters to explore for and produce oil. A TLP can be held floating in place like a giant ship by a number of flexible steel cables firmly attached to the seabed while allowing the platform to move in a restrained manner with the waves.

For depths of less than 300 metres of water, fixed platforms will continue to be used widely, but for depths exceeding 300 metres of water, floating systems and TLPs will be the most used. Progress in offshore technology has helped Brazil raise national oil production by nearly one third since the mid1980s. It has also led to the sharp rise in output in the North Sea over the past few years. Deep-water exploration and development will likely result in additional oil production in a number of countries, most notably, the United States, Nigeria, the Philippines and Malaysia. It would also likely extend the life of many old offshore oilfields, including those in the North Sea. In the United States, oil companies are planning to explore beneath 7,000 feet (more than 2,000 metres) of water in the United States part of the Gulf of Mexico.13 It is believed that the new reserves that can he explored and developed in the Gulf of Mexico could slow down the overall decline in United States oil production.

While many of these technologies are proved and well established, new ones continue to appear at a fast rate. Recent developments, particularly in drilling, such as slimhole drilling and coiled-tubing will continue to reduce costs and improN t. efficiency. Slimhole drilling and coiled-tubing enable operators to drill well, with much smaller diameters (as little as four inches) and in less drilling time than conventional drilling, resulting in savings of 20 to 35 per cent.'. In addition to the reduction in costs, this technique has environmental advantages over conventional drilling since it results in less volume of cutting and less waste of drilling fluid (mud).

Studies undertaken to assess the impact of technology on the oil and gas industry point to further room for technical progress and reduction of costs.m The major oil companies currently spend more than $3 billion per year on research and development. This represents only a fraction of the total industry investment in technology, which is aimed mainly at giving the oil industry the opportunity to bring more oil from high-cost and frontier areas at competitive prices. To accomplish this task, the industry continues to focus on reducing investment and operating costs, improving the drilling success ratio, increasing oil recovery (i.e., the ratio of cumulative oil recovered to the initial volume of oil-in-place) and reducing negative effects on the environment (see table X.3).

Research and development activities are being aimed at improving the technology for finding oil more accurately. This is being accomplished through a better understanding of the geological and physical processes that determine the migration and entrapment of hydrocarbons in the subsurface. Here the industry will continue to rely on 3 D technology, but with more sophisticated data processing and more compact on-board workstations that can analyse and interpret the large amount of data more rapidly. The industry target is to improve the drilling success ratio from the current level of one out of six to one out of three, reducing the drilling cost by half and doubling the amount of oil reserves found per well drilled. Research is also directed at improving drilling techniques, including drill bits, drilling fluids and automated drilling rigs." These rigs can be smaller, more efficient and require less manpower to operate than conventional rigs. Further improvements in slimhole drilling are expected to result in savings of up to 40 per cent over conventional drilling. There is also a great potential for further reduction of offshore costs by using fewer, lighter and more efficient platforms, and drilling fewer, highly deviated wells. Lastly, a better understanding of fluid-rock interactions can make secondary and enhanced oil recovery techniques more efficient. Until recently, expected oil recovery ratios rarely exceeded 30 per cent of the original oil-in-place. With today's and tomorrow's technologies, those ratios may possibly rise to 40 or more, and thus raise proved reserves by up to one third.0

WILL THERE BE ENOUGH OIL IN 2010?

After several years of near stagnation brought about mainly by the sharp decline in the consumption of oil in eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union, world oil demand looks set to surge over the next 15 years. As economic activity in the former centrally planned economies rebounds, the need for more oil by these economies will be added to the rapidly growing demand in the developing countries. In all, the world may seek to consume an additional 23 mbd by the year 2010.


The new oil demand, added to the 68 mbd demanded in 1994, would bring world oil consumption to about 91 mbd by the year 2010, for an average growth rate of 1.8 per cent a year, according to a model of world energy demand developed in UN/DESIPA (see figure X.4).t3 The model assesses the demand for oil, simultaneously with that for gas, coal and primary electricity, in five regional groupings of countries, based largely on income and price relationships in the period 1980-1991. In the model's baseline scenario, oil prices are assumed to remain constant in real terms over the projection period and GDP growth rates are assumed to average 2.5 per cent annually in the developed market economies, 3.5 per cent a year in the transition economies and 5.0 per cent in the developing countries.

The growth rates of output that underlie the scenario were generated by the global econometric modelling system (Project LINK) that is used to prepare the forecasts discussed in this Survey. For the present exercise, however, the forecast was extended for a longer period than usual. The results entail, in effect. the "equilibrium solution" to which the global model tends. The scenario thus embodies the model's forecast from 1995 to 2000 and then an assumption that the model's growth rates of 2001-2002 will continue until 2010. lb consider the possibility that this scenario might understate the actual growth of world output, and thus oil demand, a higher growth scenario was also tested. In that case, the rate of growth of output was set to average 3 per cent a year in the industrialized economies, 5 per cent annually in the transition economies and 5 per cent in the developing countries. In that scenario, world oil consumption in the year 2010 rises to 94 mbd.

The latter certainly seems to be an upper bound on oil demand in that year. Not only does it assume more rapid GDP growth than is expected, but it does not make allowances for changes in the structure of production that might be expected over such a long period, nor does it allow for any unusual technological development that might produce either a marked change in the energy efficiency of production or a sharp change in the cost of producing alternative fuels. Indeed, the actual demand for oil in 2010 might be considerably less than the baseline estimate of 91 mbd.

As world population is forecast by the Population Division of DESIP.A to grow at an average rate of 1.4 per cent a year over the same period, world per capita oil consumption would still be rising under the baseline or higher growth scenarios. This is despite the expectation that the share of oil in primary energy consumption will continue to decline and despite the greater efforts directed at energy conservation and substitution. The growth in per capita energy use would largely result from rising living standards and urbanization, with greater use of motor vehicles accounting for much of the increase.

Developing countries, currently accounting for 31 per cent of world oil demand, are expected to produce nearly three quarters of the growth, with their share rising to 41 per cent by the year 2010. Oil demand is expected to grow in most developing countries, but much of the growth will be in the developing countries of Asia, where oil consumption in 1994 surpassed that of western Europe.

China, which in 1993 became a net oil importer and accounted for nearly one third of the growth in world oil demand outside the former Soviet Union, is widely expected to consume about 8 mbd by the year 2010, or nearly three times its present level of consumption. Although growth in the per capita consumption of oil in China has continued uninterrupted since the late 1970s, it is still far below the world average (see table X.4).

In 1994, per capita consumption in China was only 0.9 barrels per year. By comparison, it was 24 barrels per year in the United States and 14 barrels per year in the Republic of Korea. If China had reached the latter level by 1994, it would have needed 45 million barrels per day, or two thirds of world consumption in that year.

Taking these demand considerations together with the preceding discussion of oil production and technology, there is considerable reason for optimism that adequate supplies of oil will be forthcoming at current prices (albeit adjusted for inflation). Moreover, the projected growth in demand, coupled with the expected geographical distribution of production, points to a considerable expansion in international petroleum trade. While output in the North Sea and Canada will continue to increase, production in the United States is expected to continue to decline, although its extent will depend on the degree of exploration and development success offshore, particularly in the Gulf of Mexico and in Alaska. In the medium term, the rapid decline in output in the former Soviet Union is expected to be overcome and the region will remain a large net exporter in the time period envisaged. However, Saudi Arabia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, the United Arab Emirates and Venezuela are expected to be the countries with production capacities far in excess of domestic demand. They are thus in a position to remain major suppliers over the long term.

Economic and social analysts have been pointing for several years to the rapid pace of innovations in electronics and information technology and the revolution it seems to be engendering as regards the nature of production and work, as well as that of consumption and entertainment. If the changes are as profound as alleged, one should be able to observe multiple dimensions in these changes. This seems indeed to be the case in the realm of international trade. That is, an exercise to determine which categories of the manufactured exports of the world have been the most rapidly growing points decisively to the new, highly sophisticated, "information-age" goods, which for simplicity will be identified here as "new" products.

The goods in question include the major electronic products of automatic data-processing (ADP) equipment, parts and accessories, telecommunications equipment and parts, semiconductor devices and electronic microcircuits.' Together, these goods have become a major component of total manufactured exports, compared with a rather insignificant share of manufactures trade in 1980. In other words, the growth of exports of these goods over the past decade has been quite robust and has exceeded that of other major export groups, such as chemicals, automotive products, textiles and clothing. The emergence of this group of products can thus also be said to have boosted the growth of world trade in manufactures significantly, but although some developing countries have been able to benefit from the strong growth of trade in this sector, the major suppliers and beneficiaries of this growth have been in the industrialized economies.

TRENDS IN TRADE

World exports of new products reached over $360 billion in 1993 compared with $76 billion in 1980.2 The average annual growth rate of the value of new product exports averaged nearly 13 per cent over this period, outpacing the 7 per cent annual growth of overall manufactured exports. In addition, exports of new products have been much less susceptible to slow downs in world economic activity. Export value of these new products was particularly strong between 1986 and 1990, a period when the world economy saw sustained and relatively robust growth (see table XI.!). However, the strength of new product exports exceeded that of overall world manufactured exports during this period.

Throughout this discussion, the group oi new products comprises goods classified in the following United Nations Standard International Trade Classifications, 1974 Revision SITC, Rev_2 divisions 75 (office machines and automatic data-processing equipment, parts and accessories), 76 (telecommunications and sound and television image recording equipment) and Ti, group 776 (including transistors and other semiconductors and electronic microcircuits). See Standard International Trade Classification Rev.2, Statistical Papers, Series M, No. 34/Rev.2, (United Nations publication Sales No. E.75.XVII.6. pages xxxxx division codes 75-77).

Statistics in this chapter are from the External Trade Statistics Database (COMTRADE) maintained by the Statistical Division of the Department for Economic and Social information and Policy Analysis of the United Nations Secretariat, unless otherwise stated.

 0211) W (1 fi D AND SOCIAL U HV

 The substantial deceleration in world output growth between 1990 and 1993 slowed the expansion of world manufactured export value considerably to over 3 per cent annually, and manufactured exports, excluding new products, grew at only 2 per cent annually. In contrast, new product export growth continued to average a healthy 9 per cent. This strength in new product exports continued in 1994, based on the as-yet incomplete data reported for 1994.

The growth of these exports in volume terms has been even more dramatic, as their prices have declined significantly since the 1980s. In particular, prices of computers and semiconductors have fallen sharply. A reasonable range of the estimate of average annual decline appears to be 15-25 per cent,

SOME DIMINSIONS OF AND

SOCIA I CHANGE

although estimates vary substantially.) This implies that the average annual growth of the volume of ADP equipment exports was as high as 30-40 per cent in the period 1986-1993 (in contrast to 5-6 per cent growth in the volume of overall manufactured exports).

The robust expansion of new-product exports has been an important component of the growth in manufactured exports. This is reflected in its large share of the increase in overall manufactured exports, particularly during periods of world economic slow downs. Between 1986 and 1990, new-product exports accounted for almost 14 per cent of the growth in overall manufactured exports (see table X1.1). In the early 1990s, new-product exports accounted for over 36 per cent of the growth in world manufactured exports (see table XI.1). The relative strength of new-product exports during economic downturns suggests that other factors, such as technological change and shifting location of production, have been significant in shaping export growth.

The strong performance of exports of new products raised their share of total world manufactured exports to 14 per cent in 1993 from 8 per cent in 1980 (see table XI.1). Leading the increases in the share of world exports were office machines and ADP equipment and electronic components (primarily semiconductors). The share of telecommunications equipment exports in world exports was unchanged between 1985 and 1990, but the share rose again after 1990. Developed economies remain the major suppliers of new products to the world market; in 1993 they accounted for 72 per cent of world exports. The United States of America and Japan were key exporters, accounting for over 40 per cent of new-product exports that year, while western Europe accounted for 28 per cent. However, production was even more concentrated in those countries in the early 1980s. Since then, there has been a trend as regards the location of new product export production away from the developed and towards the developing economies. In 1985, the share of all developing economies in world new-product exports (13 per cent) was less than their share in world manufactured exports (see table XI.2). By 1993, the developing economies' share in new-product exports had risen sharply (to over 28 per cent), and was significantly higher than their share in world manufactured exports (22 per cent).


Gains by developing economies in their share of world exports of new products resulted from rapid growth in all three categories of new products, and in particular from the strong growth in ADP and telecommunications equipment. In 1993, developing economies supplied 22 per cent of world exports of office machinery and data-processing equipment, and 33 per cent of telecommunications equipment compared with 6 per cent and 12 per cent respectively in 1985. Moreover, the growth in the share of exports persisted even after the slow-down in world growth in 1990. A similar pattern reflecting a steadily increasing share of developing economies of semiconductors in world exports was seen between 1990 and 1993, even though developing economies had already held a sizeable share in world exports of semiconductors in 1985.

The increasing importance of developing economies as a source of supply of new products to the world market has been largely due to the success of three Asian economies, the Republic of Korea, Singapore and Taiwan Province of China, followed by Malaysia, Thailand and Hong Kong. In 1993, these six economies accounted for 65 per cent of developing-economy exports of new products, as they have been specializing increasingly in exporting new products since the 1980s. By 1993, these products accounted for an average of 32 per cent of manufactured exports of the four newly industrialized economies (NIEs) of Asia4(see table XI.3); among them, Singapore was the most specialized with new products accounting for 56 per cent of its manufactured exports. The degree of concentration of Malaysia in new products has been similarly high, this country having based its rapid export expansion since the 1980s on the production of labour-intensive electronic goods. New products constituted 25 per cent of Thailand's manufactured exports in 1993, reflecting the country's later entry into the field because of greater reliance on other labour-intensive exports, such as textiles and garments.

The strong growth of export of new products from these Asian developing countries has been generated by the relocation of production, which has intensified since the mid-1980s. The pattern of this shift has been as follows: from Japan and the United States to the NIEs and from the Asian NIEs and Japan to Malaysia and Thailand. The large investment flows within Asia for this "offshore" manufacturing of new products have generated rapid growth in intraAsia flows in components and finished products. During the period 19861993, trade among the Asian NIEs expanded by 35 per cent annually and trade among the NIEs and Malaysia and Thailand grew at similarly high rates (see table XI.4). Trade between the NIEs and Japan increased in the 20-30 per cent range while trade between Malaysia and Thailand and Japan grew faster. As a result, there has been a significant shift in the destination of exports of the six Asian developing countries and Japan towards the NIEs instead of towards the United States. Intra-Asian exports rose to 30 per cent of total exports in 1993 from only 14 per cent in 1985; exports to the United States still constituted 36 per cent of total exports in 1993 but the figure had declined significantly, from 49 per cent in 1985 (see table XI.5).

 Apart from the increase in the United States share of world computer imports and the increase in Europe's share of telecommunications imports, no other developed regions experienced an increase in world import shares of new products

Import patterns of these new products have also shifted substantially since 1985. Although the United States and Europe are by far the most important world markets for imports in all categories of new products, between 1985 and 1993 the developing economies of Asia became significant importers of several new products, including computer peripherals, telecommunications equipment and semiconductors" The fact that the Asian developing economies are now the single largest market for electronic components (S1TC, Rev.2, Group 776), accounting for 39 per cent of world imports in 1993, reflects their rapid development as manufacturers of new products. They also account for 34 per cent of world imports of telecommunications equipment (S1TC, Rev.2, Group 764), resulting from demand for inputs as well as infrastructure investment. Their shares of imports of ADP and ADP parts and accessories (SITC, Rev.2, Groups 752 and 759) are significantly smaller at 10 per cent and 18 per cent respectively.

FACTORS UNDERLYING THE GROWTH OF TRADE IN NEW PRODUCTS

Rapid growth in demand for new products combined with a shift in production to developing economies has been the key factor leading to the sharply rising trend in world exports of new products. The growth in demand for computers and ADP equipment has been boosted by changing technology which has both lowered prices and created an increasing number of new business and consumer applications. Businesses have continued to invest heavily in computers as part of broader efforts to raise productivity. More recently, on the other hand, consumer use has grown and been shaped by the convergence of computer, communications and consumer electronics technologies, which can now provide consumers with access to a broad array of information and entertainment services.' The increasing number of applications has also resulted in a switch to more powerful machines and a demand for newer and more powerful components and peripherals. While demand for computers slowed during the decline in world growth in the early 1990s, a strong rebound has resulted from the recovery of the world economy.

A number of features of the growth in demand for new products are seen in developments in the United States market, one of the largest markets for new products and the most important single market for computers? One such feature, the rapid recovery in demand after the last economic slowdown, is reflected in the fact that United States purchases of computer systems increased substantially after the economy began to recover from the recession in 1991, as demand for computers rose to US$ 65 billion in 1993 from les:, than US$ 50 billion in 1991. Another feature, the slow growth in domestic output after the recession, resulted in computer production in 1993 at only about US$ 55 billion, leaving the gap of over $10 billion to be filled by imports. The bulk of this deficit is being filled by Asian imports, mainly from Japan, Singapore, Taiwan Province of China and the Republic of Korea. While a significant portion is from subsidiaries of United States multinationals, national manufacturers from Japan, The Republic of Korea and Taiwan Province of China are also important suppliers.

Over one half of all United States imports of semiconductors now come from Asia. The growth in exports from these Asian economies reflects, in part, their growing role as sites for offshore production facilities of United States and Japanese firms; Malaysia in particular, has, since 1987, become a leading site for the testing and assembly of semiconductors. At the same time, United States firms retained production of the more sophisticated types of semiconductors, particularly microprocessors, and still maintain an 80 per cent share in the world market.

In the area of telecommunications equipment, which includes the transmission systems purchased by public and private operators, as well as consumer equipment, such as telephones and facsimile machines, other countries besides the United States have also witnessed rapid import growth. Developing economies have embarked on broad-ranging programmes of upgrading their telecommunications infrastructure which have led to sharp increases in the demand for telecommunications equipment to be supplied from abroad. For example, China's imports of telecommunications equipment in 1993 constituted over 6 per cent of the world total, compared with a negligible share in 1985.

Another factor explaining the dynamism of new product exports is a growing worldwide specialization in production of new products since the 1980s. This has involved outsourcing of production of less technologically advanced components and products to lower-wage economies, with accompanying flows of investment, technology and inputs. Final output is exported to the economy where the investment originated and/or to third markets. The Asian developing economies in particular have been integrated into this process with rapid technological upgrading of exports.' The fact that the more advanced developing economies, such as the Republic of Korea and Taiwan Province of China, have significantly improved their competitiveness in these products has made them major world producers in their own right of certain ADP equipment and parts and electronic components.'

In semiconductors, the annual growth of world exports at 17 per cent between 1985 and 1993 substantially outpaced that of world demand, which was only 11 per cent," reflecting the importance of supply rather than demand factors in export growth. Price competition has been extremely intense and different countries have found it efficient to specialize in particular product segments. The production of the more common types of memory chips (Display Random Access Memory (DRAMs)) has shifted from the United States to relatively low-wage countries and these products have been exported throughout the world. In this regard, the Republic of Korea has become a major supplier to the world market of commodity chips, with its semiconductor exports having grown at 24 per cent annually between 1986 and 1992. It now holds 25 per cent of the DRAM market worldwide.
CONCLUSION

The strong growth of new-product exports has been an important contributor to the expansion of world trade since the 1980s. It has also sustained manufactured export growth during the weakness in world economic activity in the 1990s, when world trade in manufactured goods excluding new products increased at just over 2 per cent annually. Rapid advances in micro-electronic/information technology have stimulated world demand for these products by reducing production costs and creating a wide variety of new applications. New-product export growth is, in addition, a result of changes in the organization of supply, namely, the large-scale relocation of production, which has resulted from the increasingly rapid technological innovations in these new products and the shifting of comparative advantage in production from developed to developing economies, especially in Asia. These Asian economies have become major exporters of new products with their exports in these products reflecting a high degree of specialization. While developed economies remain the major destination for exports, the developing economies of Asia have also become a significant market.

 SOME DIMENSIONS OF AND SOCIAL

CHANGE

XII

In the mid-1980s, a secondary market arose in the debt owed to commercial banks by the Governments of many developing countries in debt crisis.' By the late 1980s, prices quoted on that market became a widely cited indicator of financial market sentiment about the progress or difficulty those countries were having in emerging from their debt crises. What is called the secondary market today is a very different creature and although prices continue to reflect investor sentiment, movements in those prices reflect other factors as well (such as general interest rate levels). Moreover, even when the effect of investor sentiment can be isolated, it cannot be taken as an indicator of the underlying economic situation in the country concerned.

THE SECONDARY MARKET IN THE 1980S

The secondary market began soon after the interruption of the servicing of commercial bank debt by a certain number of developing and eastern European countries in the early 1980s. II initially served as a means for the commercial banks to swap problem loans among themselves. The loans were usually either non-performing or subject to rescheduling. The banks entered this market when they wanted to change the country or currency composition of their assets or the schedule of interest payments. Cash sales of loans at first were infrequent and even by 1990 were still intermittent. Nevertheless, by 1986, bid and asked prices for the debt were quoted on a regular basis by certain major investment banks, centred in New York.

Although each loan had its unique aspects as far as interest and repayment obligations were concerned, they were almost all similarly structured as syndicated commercial bank loans. Most significantly, interest was usually charged as a fixed percentage point spread over a changing market rate, usually the London interbank offered rate on six-month dollar deposits or the prime rate charged by United States banks. This simplified pricing in the secondary market. As the key feature of the loans was that their future servicing was uncertain, the loans sold at a discount from face value. Prices were quoted as a fraction of face value or as cents per dollar of face value. The greater the uncertainty, the lower the price.

For example, in January 1987, there were bids to buy Argentine debt at 64 per cent of face value, but only 8 per cent for Bolivian debt; Mexican debt was quoted at 56 "cents on the dollar", but Nicaraguan debt was only 4 cents. Although the bulk of trading was in Latin American debt, quotations were also made on several African, Asian and eastern European countries. Thus, for example, Cote d'Ivoire was quoted at 77 cents and Zaire at 26; the Philippines was 71 cents and Poland was 43.2

As the 1980s wore on and the resolution of the debt crisis continued to elude the grasp of policy makers and bankers, prices in the market for many loans fell severely. Prices had been held up at first by the fact that most of the debt was not put up for trade or sale. The debt was very highly concentrated in particular, the nine "money centre" banks of the United States held more than 20 per cent of the total bank debt of the 15 major debtor countries and two thirds of the exposure of all United States banks to those countries and if a large holder of the debt offered to sell it at a discount, it would signal the death of the international debt strategy. The core of the strategy at that time (the "Baker Plan") had been to seek to reschedule debt-servicing obligations as often as necessary and lend new money to help pay interest on the belief that the debt problem was a liquidity crisis and that in time the countries would expand their foreign exchange earnings enough to once again fully service their debt. For the banks, the strategy meant that the loans could still be considered "good". If the loans were acknowledged as "bad", the banks would have had to take substantial accounting losses as they would no longer be allowed to carry them on their books at face value.3 The international strategy was, of course, not working. The fact that the banks with smaller exposures were exiting from the field and accepting losses was one indication. Weak equity share prices of the money centre banks in the United States was another. The build-up of reserves against loan losses by the banks, which began to gather momentum in 1987, was a third. By January 1990, bids on Argentine debt had fallen to only 12 cents, while Mexican bank loans slipped to 37 cents. Bids for the debt of Cote d'Ivoire fell to only 6 cents, for the Philippines 48 cents and for Poland 17 cents.

Cash sales, meanwhile, had become part of a mechanism by which several debtor countries retired significant portions of their debt, some of it through direct buy-backs, usually with donor countries providing funds for the purchase and others through various swap schemes. In some of the swaps, nongovernmental organizations purchased debt instruments at a discount and gave them to the Government on condition that public spending on specified environmental or social activities would be strengthened. The largest of the swaps, however, were debt/equity swaps, in which investors purchased portions of the debt on the market and exchanged them at the central bank of the debtor country for local currency at an advantageous exchange rate; the proceeds were then to be used for direct investment or, in certain cases, local portfolio investment.

Secondary market prices became important as well in the final set of negotiations between the indebted countries and their commercial banks and helped shape several of the agreements. Indeed, with trading activity having risen to about $65 billion by 1990,4pricing in the market was taken by some to reflect the financial sector's assessment of the expected present value of future debt servicing. The key element of the new agreements, however, would dramatically change the secondary market itself.


 In response to the broadening realization that the international debt strategy had not been working effectively enough, the Secretary of the Treasury of the United States, Nicholas Brady, proposed a new approach in 1989. The most innovative element of the "Brady Plan" was to entice the commercial bank creditors to exchange their loans for bonds at a discount, either a smaller face value of bonds paying commercial interest rates ("discount bonds") or the same face value as the original loans but paying a below-market interest rate that was roughly comparable to the discount on the other option ("par bonds"), or variations on these two approaches. The banks would thus not fully recover the original value of their loans, which matched the expectation of the secondary market of what would happen in the future. This also matched the assessment of the future by the regulatory authorities that governed the banks, as well as by the banks' own shareholders. To encourage the banks to participate, the repayment of the principal on the bonds which was not due for 30 years was to be secured, as well as some of the interest payments in many cases.5

One attraction of the Brady Plan to the banks was that it provided a better means to move value-impaired debt off their loan books. Not only were bonds treated differently than loans by bank regulators for some purposes, hut it was expected that the bonds would be more liquid, especially with their enhancements. Selling bank loans had always been a complicated operation, as they had mainly been restructured in syndications that sometimes involved 500 or more banks. These syndications resulted in various restrictions on the transferability of the loans. "Brady bonds" would be immediately and completely marketable instruments.

The first Brady Plan arrangements were completed in 1990 and as of early 1995, 13 developing or transition economies had reached agreements for converting substantial portions of their commercial-bank debt into Brady bonds (Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Jordan, Mexico, Nigeria, the Philippines, Poland, Uruguay and Venezuela). As of March 1995, $142 billion in Brady bonds were outstanding, over 86 per cent of which were issues of Latin American and Caribbean countries.5

In fact, Brady bonds quickly became popular. Many of the buyers have been commercial banks, which is less surprising than it might at first seem, since they knew the debtors' situation quite well. However, broker-dealers and aggressive fund managers have been quite active, while institutional investors such as insurance companies and pension funds entered the market relatively late and in a tentative way.,

The Emerging Markets Traders Association estimated that the trading volume in Brady bonds reached $1.7 trillion in 1994, about 60 per cent of all trading activity in sovereign risk bonds and loans of emerging-market countries. Because of the size of the market, the number of institutions that trade the assets, and the narrow spread between bid and asked prices, market analysts indeed began to view the Brady bonds as fairly liquid investments.

The difference between the Brady bond market and the market for most of the remaining bank debt of debt-troubled countries could not be more stark. The market for "loan paper" has shrunk dramatically and is generally seen as the most speculative part of an already highly speculative market. In contrast to the active trading in Brady bonds, trading in loans was $244 billion in 1994.

Once the Brady Plan began to be implemented, a -bull market" developed in the secondary market that lasted until early 1994. Of course, not all countries saw the valuation of their external obligations rise to the same degree, as countries differed in progress in economic adjustment and in negotiations with their commercial bankers. But the general trend in prices was upward and it largely continued after the bank loans were converted to Brady bonds, as may be seen in figure XII.1 for the illustrative cases of Argentina, Mexico and the Philippines.

The bull market reflected in part an optimism that the Brady Plan would finally end the commercial bank side of the debt crisis. But the prices of Brady bonds have moved for a variety of reasons, some of which had nothing to do with the market's assessment of the debt situation in the Brady Plan countries. For example, the par bonds, whose prices are shown in figure XII.1, paid fixed interest rates and as interest rates fell in the major economies in the early 1990s, the interest rates paid by the par bonds became less unattractive; thus, prices of the bonds rose. By the same token, when interest rates in some major economies began to rise in 1994, the prices of Brady bonds fell.

As may be seen in the figure, however, the drop in price in early 1994 was rather sharp and seemed out of proportion to the interest rate changes that took place at that time. Market participants say that some of the purchases of Brady bonds had been financed with short-term borrowing by speculative investors and when short-term rates began to rise, the profits of these investors began to evaporate. Instead of purchasing Brady bonds, they began to sell them and the falling prices made the original speculation on the bonds more costly, aggravating the decline.

Moreover, in some cases, the nature of the loans used to finance the bond purchases also pushed the prices down further. That is, some of the Brady bonds had been purchased "on margin", as speculative investments, wherein the buyers paid their brokers a fraction of the cost of the bonds, the broker lending the rest, with the bonds themselves held by the brokers as collateral. When the prices of the bonds fell, the value of the collateral fell and the buyers needed to produce additional cash to meet the brokers "margin call". When the cash was not paid promptly, the brokers sold the bonds into the falling market. The greater liquidity in the market also meant that there were buyers to take the bonds as their prices fell.
Indeed, for the countries whose bank debt is still quoted in the market, but where trading is very low or absent, the robustness of the market assessment implied by the price should be considered quite low.

Another reason the prices of Brady bonds fell also has little to do with the economies of the countries directly concerned. That is, many institutions now hold portfolios of Brady bonds, both mutual funds that hold the bonds as investments and market makers that hold inventories of bonds to trade. When the Mexican currency crisis erupted in December 1994, the market's assessment of the riskiness of Mexican bonds shot up. Prices of Mexican bonds thus dropped and shareholders in "emerging market" mutual funds began to redeem their shares. The funds had to obtain cash to pay for these withdrawals, which in some cases meant that the funds sold some of their bond holdings, bringing bond prices down further (or weakening the prices of uninvolved bonds). By the same token, the institutions that actively traded Brady bonds found the value of their inventory dropping and to cover their losses they also sold a variety of their holdings.

It is necessary, in other words, to be quite cautious in drawing implications about market perceptions of a country's external financial situation from changes in prices in the secondary markets Analysts have nevertheless sought to disentangle the effects of various factors that influence the price in order to find the implicit country risk premium" embodied in the bond price. Their approach was to separate the market value of a Brady bond into the present value of the risk-free principal and interest payments that are guaranteed by the "enhancements" and the remainder, which can be thought of as an unguaranteed bond. The yield on the latter, called the "stripped yield", can then be compared with the yield on a United States treasury bond of comparable maturity. The difference between the two yields, called the "stripped spread", would represent the risk premium embodied in the bond, part of which could be attributed to the structure of the bond itself and the rest to the implicit "sovereign risk".
 SOME DIMENSIONS OF AND SOCIAL CHANGE 41)

Because the individual issues of Brady bonds arose from separate negotiations with each country, their financial characteristics differ. Thus, a bond that had a higher stripped spread over treasuries than another would not necessarily imply that the market perceived the first country as the riskier one. But movements over time in the stripped spread of a country's Brady bond could reflect changes in the market perception of the riskiness of the country.

As cases in point, the spreads over treasuries of the Argentine, Mexican and Philippine par bonds are shown in figure XII.2. The spreads of the Argentine and Philippine bonds were essentially constant from mid-November to mid December 1994. The Mexican spread rose almost a full percentage point during this time, however, suggesting that the market was at least partly sensitive to the developments that were brewing. But after the Mexican crisis erupted, the spread on its par bond jumped and was 3.5 percentage points higher at the end of the year than on 15 December.

The crisis of confidence in Mexico worsened until an international rescue package was put in place in February 1995 and currency and financial markets more or less stabilized. During December and January the stripped spread on Mexico's par bonds had continued to rise as uncertainty mounted, as might be expected, ending on 9 February more than 5 percentage points higher than on 15 December. But the stripped spread on Argentina's par bond grew as well and so did that on the Philippine par bond. Indeed, the spreads on the three bonds rose and fell in tandem, if by quite different amounts. Thus, by 9 February, the Philippine spread was 1 percentage point higher than on 15 December, while that of the Argentine bond was almost 3.5 percentage points higher.

In this sense, it could be said that the Mexican crisis caused investors to increase their concern more about hemispheric neighbour Argentina and less about distant Philippines. The issue was more than geographical, however, as Argentina's "daring" strategy for stabilization through a firmly fixed exchange rate was now perceived as Argentina's "risky" strategy. The Philippines. meanwhile, was beginning to enjoy the fruits of earlier adjustment policies as energy bottlenecks, for example, began to ease (see chap. IV for a more detailed discussion of these two cases, as well as that of Mexico).

Most significantly. in neither Argentina nor the Philippines had the actual economic situation changed in a meaningful way between November 1994 and February 1995. The underlying creditworthiness of each country had not changed at all. Rather, investors, operating in a world of uncertainty and limited information, changed their minds and this change in perception reflected in the higher spreads raised the cost and limited the access of the countries to foreign finance.

 SUPPLEME \TAL

PART FOUR

REPORTS

 SUPPL E MEN T A L R EP OR

ASSESSING THE PEACE DIVIDEND RESULTING FROM THE END OF THE COLD WAR

 The present chapter discusses the "peace dividend" that resulted from the end of the cold war. At the time, this was seen as providing a large volume of resources for greatly increasing social welfare. Six years after the fall of the Berlin Wall, there is considerable disillusion about the peace dividend.

With hindsight, it can be seen that some of the expectations were unrealistic and that the economic effects of the end of the cold war, in the short or medium term, would not be commensurate with its strategic and political importance. The historical circumstances, in particular the way the cold war ended, help explain the divergence between expectations and reality and will be discussed first.

Moreover, the way in which the peace dividend was used, although perhaps less dramatic than had been widely expected, had important and beneficial economic consequences, which will be examined by reviewing changes in government accounts and by looking at the results of global econometric models. Finally, perhaps the greatest peace dividend will eventually be the formation, in the economies in transition, of vibrant market economies that are fully integrated in the world economy. The last part of the chapter shows how reforms in the crucial defence industry could help achieve this goal.

HISTORICAL BACKGROUND TO THE PEACE DIVIDEND

After the Second World War, the United States of America, then the sole possessor of nuclear weapons, demobilized rapidly. However, in 1949, after the explosion of a nuclear device by the Soviet Union, and as a result of events in Europe, the United States of America and the other developed countries built up large nuclear and conventional forces to contain what they considered the threat from the Soviet Union and its allies. The Second World War was not followed by the same degree of disarmament as had been the First World War: instead there was rearmament and the development of ever more sophisticated weapons.

In the 1970s, especially after the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, it seemed to many leaders in the developed market economies that the increasingly apparent failure of the Soviet economic and political system was escalating the danger that the leaders of the Soviet Union would stumble into war as a way of resolving that problem.i This fear of Soviet failure was quite different from the fear of the 1950s that the Soviet Union would be so economically successful as to overtake the developed market economies and be a model for other countries to follow. The NATO leaders were particularly concerned about the situation at the end of the 1970s. as it appeared that the Soviet Union had undertaken a large military build-up in the course of the decade, which could have put it in a position of military superiority.

The developed market economies, in particular the United States, accordingly embarked upon a massive build-up of conventional and nuclear arms: between 1979 and 1985, NATO's military expenditures increased by 38 per cent in real terms, This build-up decelerated as events in the Soviet Union after Mikhail Gorbachev came to power in 1985 gradually dispelled Western fears that the economic and political problems of the Soviet Union could lead to war.3 The last step in this process was the dissolution of the Soviet Union and of the Warsaw Treaty Organization and the abandonment of the centrally planned economic system. Such a massive transformation was achieved without war and with relatively little domestic violence, unlike most other changes of similar historic magnitude.4 This relatively peaceful collapse was something that few had thought possible.5

There was considerable relief that the cold war ended the way it did, but economic analysis is unable to answer the question of what would have happened if it had ended in another way. Moreover, the economic benefits that have come about from its end cannot be equated with the much larger costs that would have been incurred if there had been hostilities: the avoidance of an expense does not add to present income.

Another explanation for the popular disillusion is that the reasons for the NATO arms build-up were not fully appreciated. It was undertaken to protect NATO countries during what they foresaw would be a very difficult time the continuing deterioration of the Soviet economic system. It was, then, a temporary build-up, that, like most military build-ups was financed largely by borrowing.5 Governments did not treat the extra military effort as a permanent shift in their economies towards greater government spending.

The collapse of the Soviet economic system was unlike the destruction that the market economies of Europe suffered during the Second World War. These countries saw much of their infrastructure and industrial plant destroyed, yet had functioning economic systems, with property laws and institutions such as banks and exchanges, which, with an infusion of outside capital, could help them recover. In the case of the Soviet Union, those institutions, which could direct to civilian uses whatever resources were released by the reductions in military spending, were largely absent. Thus the reductions in military spending could not be expected to translate rapidly into a tangible peace dividend.

Another reason for disillusion stems from the fact that the peace dividend has usually been defined in terms of reductions in military spending. However, the full effects of the end of the cold war cannot be measured: they would have to include not just reductions in military spending, but also the results of greater international cooperation in a range of economic, social and environmental matters that would not have taken place with such intensity if the ideological confrontation had continued. Investment and trade flows that were generated by a relaxation of world tensions are part of the peace dividend. On the other hand, the end of the cold war also involved a diminution of the interest that the participants had shown in certain areas of the world, and the lessening or removal of whatever restraining influence they had on domestic or external military activity of their former proteges. These negative effects would have to be included in any calculation of the results of the end of the cold war.

Methodological considerations prevent such a full calculation of the effects of the end of the cold war. It would be necessary to know what would have happened independently of its end. This involves judgements on historic causality that are beyond the scope of economic analysis. Moreover, to attribute all the changes that have taken place since 1989 to the end of the cold war would be erroneous.

The more narrow way of viewing the economic consequences of the end of the cold war as the effects of the reductions in military expenditures that it made possible also involves measurement problems. In the NATO countries and the former members of the Warsaw Treaty Organization, military expenditure undertaken to offset the threat posed by the other alliance constituted a large part of total military expenditure, and so it is not wholly unrealistic to attribute all of the fall in military expenditures to the end of the cold war. In the developing countries, however, the end of the cold war had many implications. Although it improved the overall international atmosphere, in many cases it led to the end of the financial and military support previously provided by the main antagonists of the cold war and made available for world markets at substantially lower prices part of the vast stock of weapons that were now surplus to the requirements of NATO and the economies in transition. Some of these factors could be expected to lead to a decline in military expenditures, while others could be expected to lead to a temporary, and perhaps reversible, increase. Even if all the necessary data for developing countries were available, it would be extremely difficult to attribute a specific part of the changes in military spending to the end of the cold war. To attribute all of them to the end of the cold war and characterize them as a peace dividend is not optimal but is common practice.?

RECENT TRENDS IN MILITARY SPENDING

For the world as a whole, and for almost all regions, the military burden, whether measured by the share of military spending in GNP or in central government expenditure, was considerably lower in 1993 than in 1983 (see table XIII.1).1 According to these estimates, in 1983 this burden was very heavy for the countries members of the Warsaw Treaty Organization: military spending absorbed 12 per cent of GNP and 44 per cent of central government expenditures. The comparable figures for NATO were 5 per cent and 15 per cent. For the world as a whole, military spending declined from 5.7 per cent of GNP in 198.3 to 3.3 per cent in 1993. The decline was even greater in the developing countries from 6.1 per cent to 3.1 per cent of GNP.

An example of how military spending can fall for a number of reasons, many unrelated or only partly related to the end of the cold war, was provided by Israel. A study of Israel's defence expenditure found that reasons for the decline in Israel's military expenditure (total defence consumption declined from 25 per cent of GNP in the early 1980s to less than 12 per cent in the early 1990s) were as follows: "the 1979 peace agreement with Egypt (and Egypt's declining military budgets from 18.1 per cent of GNP in 1972 to 10 per cent in 1984), the economic crisis of the mid-1980s that led to a realization that a strong economy is a vital component of national security: the defeat of Iraq by the U.S. lead coalition: the gradual phasing out of the Israel Defence Forces's active modernization which began in the mid-1970s This perception was reinforced in the later 1980s when a militarily strong empire such as the Soviet Union collapsed due to severe economic problems". See Alex Mintz and Randolph T Stevenson, "Global political change. defense spending and the peace dividend in Israel". paper prepared far the Project LINK/international Peace Research Institute of Oslo (LINK/PRIO) Meeting on the Wages of Peace An International Project. United Nations. New York. March 1995, pp. 21-22.

These trends are derived from United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, World Military Expenditure and Arras Transfers, 1993-1994 (Washington D. C., 1995): They use the statistical definitions. coverage and groups of countries as applied by that Agency.

 AND SOCIAL SUR V F Y 1 9 9 5

Table X111.2 shows the shares of global military spending accounted for by the different regions and average annual growth rates in real terms between 1988 and 1993. By 1983, the NATO build-up had resulted in its share of total world military spending exceeding that of the Warsaw Tieaty Organization -42 per cent as against 35 per cent. By 1993, after the sharp reductions in military expenditure between 1988 and 1993 in the former Warsaw Treaty Organization, the NATO share of world military expenditure was over three times greater 55 per cent as against 15 per cent. The rate of decline in the developed market economies was moderate 2.6 per cent for NATO as a whole, and 1.1 per cent for Western Europe. The United States, whose earlier build-up had been more rapid than that of Western Europe, saw a sharper decline.


Economic difficulties in Africa and the increasing democratization of South America help explain the declines in military expenditure in these regions. In the Middle East, the decrease in expenditure in real terms was moderate 0.2 per cent a year. However, military expenditures in this region are subject to wide year-to-year changes. Military expenditures in East Asia and South Asia increased, yet the figures given in table XIII.1 for the burden that military expenditures placed on these economies, in terms of shares of GNP and central government expenditure, illustrate that, in general, rapid economic growth allowed them to increase their military spending and reduce the burden it placed on the economy. This was especially so for China.

What is important for the individual country is the quality and quantity of the armed forces and the weapons deployed by its likely opponents, rather than their cost to them and, at least as far back as the Hague Conference of 1899, these issues, rather than the sums expended on military forces, have been the topic of disarmament negotiations. 9 Accordingly,table X111.3 gives indices for force levels and for two of the main weapons platforms combat aircraft and main battle tanks on the basis of 1980 levels.


For NATO, the defence build-up was in military equipment rather than in the size of the armed services and was concentrated in the United States.10 This build-up was viewed in NATO primarily as an attempt to catch up with past increases in the size of the forces of the then Warsaw Treaty Organization, rather than to match current increases: in the same period, the size of the armed forces of the Warsaw Treaty Organization was practically stable.

After 1986/87, both NATO and the economies in transition cut the size of their armed services and military equipment. However, the cuts were much sharper in the latter: in 1994/95, the developed market economies still had about 17 per cent more tanks and 6 per cent more combat aircraft than in 1980/81, whereas the economies in transition had 36 per cent fewer tanks and 20 per cent fewer combat aircraft.11

Military spending patterns outside the industrialized countries

The progress of the cold war largely determined the military spending of the NATO countries and the economies in transition. Yet, for many other countries, the main threat did not appear to come from either alliance, but from countries in the same region or domestic opponents. Relatively little direct relationship could, then, be expected between trends for militar) spending in the developing countries and those in the NATO and former Warsaw Treaty Organization countries. This was the case in recent years. Military spending in the developing countries as a whole reached a peak in real terms in 1983 and had declined 13 per cent by 1989. Between 1989 and 1992, it increased by 14 per cent in real terms and then fell by 11 per cent in 1993.12

The case of China has to be examined first.0 Its armed forces are probably the largest in the world and, according to one source, it is ranked third among military spenders.0 China is in the Asia region which, as shown in table XIII.2, has seen increases in military spending in recent years. Table XIII.3 shows that the size of China's armed services fell sharply between 1980/81 and 1986/87 and that after 1986, its stocks of tanks and aircraft fell. However, this decline was very different from that which occurred in the USSR and reflected a modernization rather than a shrinkage of the military establishment. The table also shows that in "Other Asia", which includes India, Pakistan and the group of newly industrializing economies, stocks of tank and aircrafts expanded rapidly. As with China, the ability to pay for extra military equipment out of rising incomes seems an important determinant of military expenditure for many developing countriesis

In general, the developing countries increased the size of their armed forces and their holdings between 1980 and 1986/87 and between 1986/87 and 1994/95. One exception was sub-Saharan Africa whose stocks of tanks and aircraft fell after 1986/87.

In the Middle East, the size of the armed forces shrank after 1986, but the stocks of equipment rose. The effects of hostilities on the stocks of weapons are seen from the trends in the combined total of the military establishments of the Islamic Republic of Iran and Iraq: by 1994/95, although they had larger armed forces than in 1980/81, they had fewer tanks and aircraft. The stocks of weapons held by the main participants in the peace process Egypt.

IS China's aim was to strike a "reasonable balance of defence construction and economic reconstruction'. For a fuller discussion of how this balance was struck, between the upper limit which "could not be exceeded while keeping the economy operating property" and the lower limit "which keeps the army operating properly", see Zheng Kaithao. "From national defense construction to economic reconstruction: a report from China", paper prepared for the UNK/PRIO Meeting on the Wages of Peace An International Project. United Nations. New York, March 1995, pp. 21-22.

Israel, Jordan and the Syrian Arab Republic increased over time, but as this process was initiated only in 1991, the figures cannot be expected to reflect fully recent positive developments.

MEASURING THE PEACE DIVIDEND AS A REDUCTION IN MILITARY EXPENDITURE

From the preceding discussion, it can be seen that, in absolute terms, the reduction in world military expenditures occurred in the developed market economies and the economies in transition rather than in the developing countries. One calculation was that if the developed market economies, the economies in transition and China had spent the same amount on defence in real terms in the years 1988 to 1994 as they had in 1987 they would have spent a total of $807 billion more on defence in this period than they in fact did. The comparable figure for the developing countries was $126 billion% (see box XI11.1 for a discussion of calculating the peace dividend as a reduction in military spending).


 MEASURINg THE PEACE DIVIDEND

For the importance of discounting future flows to arrive at a figure for the net present value, see Tamin Bayourni, Daniel Hewitt and Steven Syman-sky. The impact of worldwide military spending cuts on developing countries". International Monetary Fund paper (WP/93/86, November 1993), appendix.

ONE APPROACH TO MEASURING THE PEACE dividend is to estimate the reductions of military budgets. The peace dividend, in this approach, is either the accumulated reductions calculated against a base year or the sum of yearly changes over a series of years. These calculations are based on historical figures and projections for prospective reductions are made on the assumption that military expenditures will be reduced by a certain percentage each year over future years. The allocation of the presumably released resources is not an intrinsic part of the peace dividend in this approach and, when considered, is often restricted to a simple trade-off between military and social expenditures. Obviously, short-term adjustment costs and long-term benefits cannot be considered within this framework.

Moreover, such methods of calculating the peace dividend are heavily dependent on the base year chosen. A different base year would result in a totally different peace dividend. An attempt to avoid this problem could be made by applying a "trend" line, based on past expenditures, to determine what would have been military expenditures in a future period. The size of the peace dividend would then be the difference between projected and actual expenditures. This method is highly dependent on the time horizon used to fit "the trend". As the period 1980-1987 saw an expansion in military spending, calculating the peace dividend in this way for the years from 1988 would have resulted in an even greater figure than that derived from using 1987 as the base: a "trend" line would have shown military spending expanding steadily. In the case of the United States, for instance, in 1987 military spending absorbed 6.3 per cent of GDP. An extrapolation of the trend of military spending as a percentage of GDP, based on the period 1979-1987, would have resulted in military spending absorbing 7.8 per cent of GDP in 1994. In fact, in 1994, military spending was 4.3 per cent of GDP (see the figure). Similarly, choosing a period in which military expenditure was decreasing, as in the 1970s, in order to calculate "the trend", would have resulted in a much smaller peace dividend.

Finally, most calculations of the present value of a future income flow apply a discount factor, yet estimates of the peace dividend derived from future "savings", compared to a peak year or a trend line, in effect apply a discount rate of zero.'

It would be misleading, however, to view these reductions as wholly unanticipated savings that could be readily diverted to alternative uses. Military spending increases when there is, or appears to be, a threat, when hostilities actually break out and sometimes when overall economic conditions allow for an expansion in procurement. It decreases when the perceived threat diminishes or when economic conditions deteriorate.

Figures for the world's largest military power, the United States, illustrate this point. Defence expenditure was a small percentage of GDP before the Second World War 1.7 per cent of GDP and 17.7 per cent of federal outlays in 1940, when the latter were only 10 per cent of GDP (see figure XIII.1). In the Second World War, defence expenditure reached nearly 40 per cent of GDP and 90 per cent of federal outlays, which were 45 per cent of GDP. They then declined to 3.7 per cent of GDP in 1948 as the United States demobilized. This was the lowest level they were to reach in the post-war period.

Subsequent peaks in military spending were at an increasingly smaller percentage of output and of government spending. Defence spending reached a maximum of 14.5 per cent of GDP during the Korean war and absorbed 69 per cent of federal outlays, which were themselves 21 per cent of GDP. In 1968, at the height of the Viet Nam war, defence spending reached 9.7 per cent of GDP and 4.6 per cent of federal outlays and, in 1986, during the last cold war arms build-up, 6.5 per cent of GDP and 23.5 per cent of federal outlays. By 1994, its share had declined to 4.3 per cent of GDP and, in 1996, it is expected to reach 3.7 per cent the same amount as in 1948.

As defence as a percentage of GDP (and of federal outlays) declined, nondefence federal outlays increased: from 8.7 per cent of GDP in 1960 to 17.0 per cent in 1986 and 19.0 per cent in 1994. The increase, especially in the early years, can be partly attributed to military-strategic considerations. After the Soviet Union put the first satellite in space, the United States felt that it had fallen behind in technology and should catch up by devoting considerable resources to education. There was at that time a considerable constituency for increasing non-military spending, especially on education, but also in other social sectors, and the reductions over time in military spending helped pay for these added expenditures.

In the 1980s, however, the political mood was very different from that of the 1960s: a main objective was to reduce or at least stabilize the tax burden. Increases in federal expenditure, including that on defence, were not matched by increases in revenues and the deficit grew. Gross federal debt, which had declined from 57.6 per cent of GDP in 1960 to 33.5 per cent in 1981, grew to reach 71.5 per cent of GDP in 1993. Interest payments absorbed an increasing percentage of outlays. A major objective has therefore become the reduction of the budget deficit.

Because of a reluctance to increase tax rates or to reduce non-military spending by a compensating amount, the levels of military expenditure reached in 1987 can be viewed as unsustainable. One simulation by project LINK showed that, if the United States armed forces had remained at their 1987 level, defence expenditures would have stayed at around 6-6.5 per cent of GDP, then, under existing policies, the ratio of net federal debt to GDP would have increased by about 50 per cent between 1987 and 1997.17 The peace dividend, rather than being viewed as the release of considerable resources for alternative uses, should, in these circumstances, be viewed as the avoidance of what would have occurred if 1987 levels of military expenditure had continued. These alternatives depend upon the assumptions that are made about government and market behaviour and would include such possibilities as a reduction in non-defence spending, an increase in taxes or a financial crisis resulting from the market's loss of faith in the ability of the government to handle the situation in the face of mounting deficits.

THE BUDGETARY ALLOCATION OF THE PEACE DIVIDEND

The above considerations illustrate how, by apparently doing nothing when defence expenditure falls, a Government is in fact making a decision. If the United States, for example, had decided to increase federal spending on roads by the same amount as the reductions in federal spending on defence, the results, in terms of the budget deficit and long-term interest rates, would probably have been the same as if military spending had remained constant (although, by removing transport constraints, such federal spending might have led to higher long-term rates of economic growth). In this example, the alternative to an expanded federal highway network and perhaps higher interest rates as a result of a larger budget deficit would have been lower interest rates, which would have encouraged businesses to expand their capital equipment and made it easier for local governments to borrow to expand their own infrastructure, including roads. There is no single best government decision on how to reallocate the resources released by reduced military expenditure. Such analysis would require a country-specific analysis and a detailed examination of the long-run economic benefits of different types of expenditure government investment in infrastructure, social spending or business investment.

One of the major concerns of Governments in recent years has been the size of their budget deficits and the overall level of their debut! The debate on the balanced budget amendment to the Constitution of the United States has helped highlight the importance of this issue on the Government's policy agenda. The Maastricht Treaty specified that accumulated debt levels in the countries of the European Union that wished to enter the monetary union should not exceed 60 per cent of GDP. If this is taken as a bench-mark figure for government debt, then few countries in the Union, or indeed in the developed market economies, could have met it. The Maastricht Treaty also specified that the budget deficit should not exceed 3 per cent of GDP. In 1985, most of the developed market economies, with the exception of Germany and some of the Nordic countries, had a deficit that was near to or in exces.s of this amount.

In the developing countries, the picture was considerably more varied, with several important regional military powers, including Egypt, India, Morocco and the Syrian Arab Republic, having deficits approaching 10 per cent of GDP in 1985. On the other hand, with the exception of Thailand, the newly industrializing countries Indonesia, Malaysia, the Republic of Korea, and Singapore had small budget deficits or even surpluses.

In sum, the starting position for the military build-down, in about 1985, was such that, for many countries, especially the developed market economies, much of any reductions in expenditure could have been expected to be used to reduce the budget deficit.

Reductions in military expenditures and changes in the government budgetary position

Tables X111.4 and XIII.5 give figures for the countries for which data were available on the changes in the share of defence expenditure and of nondefence government expenditure and the budget position, as a percentage of GDP, between the years 1985 and 1990.19 Because of the problem of accounting for inflation, looking at these changes in shares is perhaps the most reliable way of seeing how Governments used the peace dividend.

This approach could be misleading because fast-growing countries, particularly those of Asia, often increased their military spending in real terms but saw it fall as a percentage of GDP. However, growing military spending that constitutes a declining share of a growing economy poses less of a burden than an increasing share of society's resources going to defence when the economy is declining or stagnant.

Defence spending is invariably a central government function and decisions on how to fund it, or how to use revenues for various purposes, are taken by the central Government. On the other hand, much of expenditure on the social sector, including roads, education and health, is undertaken and financed by local authorities, which enjoy varying degrees of autonomy from the central authority, including the right to raise revenues for their own purposes. A fall in one item of central government expenditure, then, does not automatically mean that matching funds are available for use by local governments on social services. On a broad level, however, the choices between spending on defence and on the social sector are made by society.

Finally, this way of looking at the budgetary allocation of the peace dividend compares two points in time and does not take into account the business cycle and therefore changes in the full employment budget position. A large deficit and a high level of non-defence government spending in one year could have been caused by a recession, bringing with it lower tax revenues and higher nondefence government spending, particularly on unemployment benefits. However, the data for many countries do not exist to calculate what would have. 

For most countries in table XIII.5 the budget position improved. The broad picture, especially for the developed market economies, is that the shares in GDP of total government expenditure and its constituents, non-defence and defence, fell, and the deficit situation improved. However, in many countries, the fall in the share in GDP of total government expenditure was greater than the improvement in the budget position, reflecting a fall in the share of government revenue in GDP. This lightening of the tax burden, assisted by the reduction in the share of military expenditure in GDP, might have been an objective for Governments fearful of the electoral consequences of increasing taxes.21 The range over which the share of defence spending changed was much narrower than that for changes in non-defence spending and the budget position: only in the cases of Egypt. Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic did the share of defence spending in GDP fall by more than 2 per cent. In Israel, military and nonmilitary government spending were claiming over 60 per cent of GDP; the reduction in military spending was accompanied by a reduction in non-military government expenditures, which brought the claim of government on output down to nearly 50 per cent. Revenues declined even further and the deficit actually widened. In the Syrian Arab Republic and Egypt, the shares of revenues also declined, but the reductions in the shares of military and non-military government expenditures enabled the fiscal balance to improve. In Chile, the fiscal position improved after a sharp reduction in non-defence expenditure. This reflected the policy to shrink the State: to remove government from the majority of people's lives while trying to maintain a safety net for the poorest. 72 In Chile, defence spending by 1990 was just over 2 per cent of GNP. In that country, as in many other developing countries, where, as table XIII.1 shows, military spending had, by 1993, been reduced to a similarly small percentage of GNP, further reductions on the scale of the past cannot be expected.

The choice between military and social expenditures

There is considerable discussion at the international level of the need for Governments to increase social spending and to decrease military spending. Tables XIII.6 and X111.7 give figures for changes in the combined share of GDP going to central government expenditure on health, education, social welfare and housing, which is taken as a measure of the social expenditure incurred by Governments. The changes in this total are compared with the changes in the total for defence. The periods examined are 1980-1985 and 1985 to the most recent year for which data are available. If there were to have been an immediate trade-off between military and social spending, the entries would have been clustered in the upper left and lower right quadrants. Instead, the entries were distributed in all four quadrants.

In the first period, when the share of military spending tended to rise, especially in the developed market economies, social spending also increased in many countries. In the second period, the share of military spending declined in most of the countries shown and the share of social spending also fell in a number of them. In this period, there was only one country that showed an increase in the share of defence expenditure and a decline in the share of social expenditure. Kuwait, a surplus energy exporter, was able to increase both military and social spending in both periods.

These data do not establish that there is no relationship between military and social spending. An almost instantaneous trade-off would, in any event, not have been expected. Moreover, changes in social spending are not just determined by the availability of resources rele.ased by a decrease in other items of government spending, including military spending, but by long-term factors, such as changes in the composition of the population. The political process also helps decide what role government can and should play in the area of social welfare. In order to examine the relationships between social spending and the availability of government resources, it would be necessary to develop a social welfare function. However, the limited number of developing countries in tables X111.6 and X111.7 highlights the weakness of the statistical basis for work in this field. The continent of Africa probably sees the starkest clashes between military expenditure and social spending, but the data required to examine the problem are not currently available on a timely and consistent basis. One effect of the growing international concern over military expenditure in developing countries has been to give greater urgency to the collection of relevant data on the military burden.

MODELLING THE EFFECTS OF ALLOCATING THE PEACE DIVIDEND

The above analysis, which looked at changes in the share of government expenditure going to the different items, cannot assess the total effects on economic growth and welfare of the decisions that Governments made.

However, it has been difficult to test the long-term effects of a switch from military to civilian expenditure. The benefits of disarmament are not instantaneous: disarmament should be seen as an investment process, where present costs have to be incurred in order to realize greater future gains.n Disarmament itself involves immediate costs unemployment benefits must be paid to discharged members of the armed services and redundant workers in the defence industries and costs are incurred in the destruction of weapons and the verification of arms control agreements.n Developing alternative uses for government funds can itself entail an initial investment cost. For instance, in the case of education and health expenditures, schools, hospitals and clinics might have to be built and teachers, doctors and social workers trained in order for outlays to be raised permanently. In other words, spending the peace dividend is not simply a question of moving monies from one pocket to another.

Econometric models have been used to assess the effects of changes in military expenditure on other economic variables. They are themselves based on an underlying economic model, and on assumptions about the policy of the Govemment.25 In the short term, the demand-depressing effects of reducing military expenditures tend to dominate the results produced by these models. In the longer term, assumptions have to be made about technological progress, without the spur of military research, and the volume and productivity of any new investment that would derive from a fall in military expenditure. Strong results that come from individual country studies are often not reflected in cross-country studies, especially ones that draw on a large and disparate sample. The causes of long-term economic growth are not fully understood. It is, then, unremarkable that long-term analyses of the effects on economic growth of changes in military expenditure have often not yielded strong results.a

Using global econometric models

The way in which the peace dividend is used will have repercussions not just on the national economy but, in the case of an important player in the global economy, such as the United States, on the global economy.

However, it is difficult for many econometric models to calculate the effects of switching government expenditure from military to alternative expenditures. This involves distinguishing not only between private and government consumption and investment expenditures, but also between different items of government expenditure. In highly aggregated models, the reallocation of government expenditure from the military to the social sector, even if feasible, would alter the composition, but not the overall volume of GNP and so would not be fully reflected in shortto medium-term results. Moreover, unless a higher return were expected from the latter expenditure, long-term economic growth would not be markedly different. Assessing the effects of any tax cut that a reduction in military spending made possible would involve an analysis of the long-run effects of a switch towards private consumption and investment, which would in turn require a model of how economic growth is changed by particular investment outlays.n

Macroeconomic models can, however, prove useful in showing the effects of a policy of not increasing government expenditure to compensate for the decline in defence expenditure. The primary and related effects will be on interest rates, through an improvement in the budget situation, and on the exchange rate. The exchange rate effect is also partly dependent on whether the country is a net importer or exporter of arms.

Global models can also bring out the international effects of reduced military expenditure on non-participating countries. These mirror the domestic adjustment process: initially, the contractionary effects of disarmament in reducing aggregate demand generate negative spill-overs as exports of third countries are reduced. In some models, the process is further exacerbated as the exchange rate of contracting countries depreciates. In the medium-term, however, many, especially developing, countries benefit from the reduction in interest rates brought about by deficit reductions in countries that are reducing their military outlays, in particular the United States. That effect is largest if the military expenditure reductions are used primarily for deficit reduction
spending reallocations within public sectors will not generate that effect, even though they will also minimize the size of the initial negative shock on economic activity.

The results of global models

In an attempt to evaluate the orders of magnitude of the international economic effects of further military spending cuts. the LINK system was used to simulate coordinated multilateral military expenditure cuts in a large number of industrialized and developing countries. The case for multilateral action is that there exists a positive welfare effect as a result of potentially increased international security that could not be secured by unilateral disarmament. While unilateral efforts would likely have similar economic consequences, their effectiveness from the perspective of international security would not be so great.

Specifically, the simulation envisaged cutbacks in 14 industrialized countries, in three developing countries, including China, and in the Russian Fed-eration.s These countries include most of the large military spenders. which account for the overwhelming share of current military spending. In all countries the 1993 shares of military expenditures in GNP would be reduced by one quarter by the year 2002, beginning in l994.n Those reductions were analysed under two alternative recycling assumptions: in one case, all spending reductions were used uniformly for deficit reductions; that is, they reduced the net claims of public sectors on capital markets, while in the second case, in the major industrialized countries (the Group of Seven), income tax reductions were used to recycle savings to private households: in this case the reductions in military spending were deficit neutral. In the first case, according to the assumptions behind the LINK model, large interest rate reductions could be expected, while in the second case private consumption spending would cushion the con-tractionary effects of reductions in government spending.

Figure XIII.2 shows the effects of multilateral disarmament on world trade and world GDP as deviations from the baseline growth trend. The orders of magnitude are smaller in the case of deficit neutrality than in that of deficit reduction. However, the adjustment paths are quite comparable. While over an initial period of about five years the negative effects on aggregate output growth dominate the picture, world GDP growth will return to its baseline path thereafter, led by an improvement in world trade. Reflecting the changes in GDP, unemployment is initially expected to rise in industrialized countries, in the range of 0.3 per cent to 0.7 per cent. 30 However, after the required adjustment, unemployment rates tend to be below the LINE. baseline, as a result of the creation of additional jobs in non-defence sectors and fairly successful conversion.

Figure XIII.2 shows that world trade revives after two years in the case of a deficit neutral fall in military expenditures, although its subsequent growth is slower than under the scenario of deficit reduction. The effect on trade balances is greater under the scenario of deficit reduction. Figure XIH.3 shows that under both scenarios, the inital shock reduces the trade balances of the developing countries from the baseline as they export less to the more slowly growing developed market economies. Yet after three or five years, the trade balances of the developing countries are more favourable than under the baseline scenario, and those of the developed market economies less favourable.

During the decade-long adjustment process, trade balances are likely to shift, both between developed and developing countries and within these larger groupings. In the long run, according to the LINK results, developing economies are likely to gain slightly, in the range of $10-$20 billion annually. Many industrialized countries gain slightly. For the most part this reflects the relatively rapid and successful turnaround in the United States. As the domestic economy is stimulated in the medium term, imports are increased; this effect is even stronger when private demand is stimulated additionally through tax reductions in response to cuts in defence expenditures.

The orders of magnitude for both the reduction in GDP and the changes in world trade are modest when compared to the historic importance of the end of the cold war. The reason is that, under this scenario, the shock to the world economy, in terms of the reduction in military spending, was about 0.6 per cent of global GDP. On top of this came cuts in military employment in some countries which added another small negative effect.

Yet over the longer run, and under slightly accommodating discretionary policies, econometric models indicate that the overall macroeconomic effects are unambiguously positive. In models that focus on important forward-looking elements of international capital markets both the turn-around and the longrun implications tend to be slightly more favourable.m On average, global models indicate that the reduction in long-term interest rates as a result of cuts in military spending are between 60 and 180 basis points.

The main findings of econometric analyses are, therefore, that the short-run effects of military spending cuts are likely to be mildly contractionary, while in the medium-to-long term, supply improvements will dominate and lead to an increase in potential output, and its utilization, on a global scale.

Under all circumstances the spill-over effects on third countries appear extremely moderate, never exceeding two tenths of one per cent of GDP in the aggregate. None the less, the regional distribution of costs and benefits is diverse, reflecting the size of the initial shock, differences in domestic adjustment paths and, above all, substantial differences in the response to changes in international capital markets. The turnaround in the United States is much faster and more pronounced than in the other industrialized countries. The capital market effects in the United States, the country which undertook the largest military spending cuts and which is also central for global capital markets, are much more pronounced and direct. Similarly, there were substantial differences across developing countries, with debtor countries in Latin America benefiting, especially from the reduction in world interest rates, while South-East Asian economies were affected negatively by the trade effects. Furthermore, the results indicated that there would be considerable effects of the significant military spending cuts in eastern and central Europe and in the States of the former Soviet Union.

Yet the econometric results indicate that focusing on the direct benefits to developing countries as a result of the peace dividend could be misguided. The call for a direct transfer of parts of the "savings" generated by military spending reductions in mostly industrialized countries risks misinterpreting the nature of these "savings". No international reallocation can be without consequences in the source country of these funds. Global econometric studies of the peace dividend, including not just those undertaken by Project LINK but also by the International Monetary Fund with its MULTIMOD, show that the main effect was on interest rates. These were lower in the developed market economies, and therefore globally, than they would otherwise have been.s Investment and economic growth in the developed market economies were spurred by the lower interest rates, which led to greater demand for the exports of the developing countries. The lower interests rates were of major importance to the developing countries, allowing them to service their debts and to attract new capital more easily. According to this exercise, the size of these indirect benefits was much larger than the potential gains for the developing countries from any feasible increase in official development assistance.

Simulations have also illustrated the importance of policy credibility's. If the market believes that there will be cuts in defence expenditure and that these are part of a credible budget reduction programme, the effect could be to lower interest rates. These effects could be annulled by a loss of confidence in the Government's management of the rest of the economy: the market might believe, for instance, that, although military expenditure might fall, other government actions would lead to the deficit widening. Empirical work on the connections between movements in interest rates and in budget deficits have often failed to produce strong results, as, clearly, many factors affect interest rates.s Credibility is a vital factor.

DIFFERENCES IN CONVERSION BETWEEN THE DEVELOPED MARKET ECONOMIES AND THE ECONOMIES IN TRANSITION

Conversion in the developed market economies

Most of the models used to predict the full impact of defence expenditure reductions cannot take into account the long-term effects of conversion changing industries from military to civilian production. This is not to deny the immense potential benefits of such a reorientation.

As pointed out in the World Economic Survey, 1992, conversion in the developed market economies has largely been left to market forces, and defence firms have responded by mergers among themselves rather than by actually changing from military to civilian production. This continues to be the broad pattern. If there were attractive investment opportunities for defence firms before the end of the cold war, there was every reason for them to pursue them at that time rather than wait for a reduction in military orders before doing so.

The long-term effects of the down-sizing of the defence sector will largely depend on whether overall research and development will slow down now that the specific research and development that the military generated is smaller. Many of the advances in technology, such as computers, were spurred by the military, and some of the most technologically advanced of the developing countries Israel, the Republic of Korea and the Taiwan Province of China built up a domestic technological capacity for security reasons. s However, it now appears that there is a growing divergence between civilian and military research needs. s Moreover, it has frequently been pointed out that two countries which enjoyed easy access to the products of the United States military industry, Germany and Japan, were able to concentrate their research on civilian rather than military purposes and experienced higher rates of growth than a country such as the United Kingdom, which had a relatively larger anus industry and so concentrated its research more on the military sector.

In the developed market economies, the question of converting military industries to civilian production has not normally been considered urgent by Governments. They have tended to view the matter as similar to the many changes in industrial structure, such as the run-down of the some smoke-stack industries, that take place in any economy. Given that the rest of the economy is growing, the labour shed by the military sector should be absorbed, although specific geographical localities and workers with skills of limited transferability will undoubtedly be adversely affected and might require government assistance in the transition.

Whereas it is possible for Governments of countries with developed market economies to leave matters to the operation of market forces, such an option is not possible in those countries that still do not have adequate market mechanisms. As discussed earlier, the end of the cold war was essentially the largely peaceful collapse of a failing economic system. Military spending was a very important part of the centrally planned economies (see table XIII.1). The success and the potential costs of failure of the move to a market system, of which the reduction in the military burden and the conversion effort are vital ingredients, is of crucial importance not just for the economies in transition but also for the global economy.

Specific features of conversion and restructuring in the economies in transition

In any circumstances. defence conversion, which involves the reallocation of military production capacities to the civilian sector is a very complex and costly process, rarely resulting in pmfitability.37 However, the situation in the economies in transition constitutes a specific case, combining the worst possible conditions: by and large, their defence industry represented an extremely large sector in the economy, (see box X111.2) and the conversion process is being executed in a particularly unfavourable social and economic domestic environment.

Although the situation varies according to each country, in most of the countries in transition, the transformation of the defence industries has reached crisis dimensions unparalleled in any part of the world. In the Russian Federation, for instance, defence procurement is currently one ninth of what it was in 1992, and spending on military research and development is one eighth. Drastic cutbacks in procurement, inadequate financing of the industries, low wages (approximately 60 per cent of those in the economy as a whole) caused a loss of about 2 million people in the defence complex, which still employs around 4.5 million people. n Enterprises have begun to shut down production: a 1993 study found that out of 1,500 defence-related enterprises in St. Petersburg, 300 were idle, 400 were working at significantly less than full capacity and 140 were close to terminating production.

Defence conversion can be viewed as just a part of the general restructuring process linked to the transition. Yet the similarities between this situation and that in the developed market economies after both the First and Second World Wars, when human and material resources were reallocated from one use to another, are probably fewer than the differences* (for a description of stages in the conversion process in the former Soviet Union, see box X111.3).


THE SOVIET DEFENCE INDUSTRIAL SECTOR

These very high figures do not, however, mean that around one fourth of the Russian labour force was engaged in 1989 in arms production, since a considerable amount of civilian goods were being produced by the military-industrial sector

The figures for the Soviet Union are for 1987 because of reliability problems with more recent data

Even as late as 1989, Soviet leaders were told by the Intelligence Service that the United States could produce 50,000 tanks a year, and western European NATO countries another 25,000, in the year following the outbreak of a conflict_ Mobilization capacities were therefore tailored to face such Production levels.

The Soviet defence industrial sector was predominantly a Russian one: Russia accounted for not less than two thirds of its production. As a whole, the share of total industrial employment dependent upon the defence industry was around 25 per cent in Russia, 18.6 per cent in Ukraine and 17.4 per cent in Belarus.a However, this did not preclude some extremely important links with other republics where the defence sector's share was quite small. As inter-republican trade was essential to the operation of the military-industrial sector, the collapse of the Soviet Union, and much more the collapse of inter-CIS trade, created especial economic and social difficulties.

Another important characteristic was that regional concentration of military-linked activities was quite high. In Russia, three regions had a very high percentage of defence industry controlled employment: the North-West (with the St. Petersburg industrial basin as well as military productions in Pskov and Nerve), the Urals and Volga-Vyatka. In Ukraine too, some regions have a high concentration of defence industry controlled employment. The percentage went up to 72 per cent in Nikolaevsk, and was significantly above 30 per cent in such regions as lvano-Frankovsk, Kiev, Crimea, L'voy, Kherson, Khmelnitsk and Cherkassk.

Military enterprises were large compared with firms in other countries and even in Russia (see the tables).' Their size was the product of both diversification and internalization, unable to obtain components of the required quality from the civilian industrial sector, defence-related enterprises frequently produced what they needed themselves. This internalization process contributed to the effectiveness of the enterprise in anticipation of shortages of inputs from outside suppliers. However, it contributed to low economic efficiency as a large number of internal shops were redundant or working at the lower end of the economies of scale. Their size was also the result of mobilization capacities. Defencerelated enterprises were expected to be able to surge quickly to higher levels of production if an international crisis occurred. Overmanning and equipment redundancies were consciously organized to help produce this surge if and when needed.`

In these circumstances, rigid conversion was likely to generate massive regional unemployment pockets, with severe social consequences. The very fact that part of the social support system was managed by enterprises and not through government agencies, whether federal or local, could only exacerbate this problem.

 IN TERMS OF CONVERSION, the former Soviet Union is a case on its own, because of the very size of the defence-related sector and its impact on the economy.

Conversion was launched as a traditional administrative state programme in 1988 but its goals were never clearly defined (conversion or diversification? conversion or the improvement of civilian industry?) and its methods of implementation were clearly at odds with the systemic changes which had by then already begun in the former Soviet Union'.

Uncertainties clouding conversion were linked to many factors. The Soviet leaders had some difficulties deciding about the role of the conversion process. It was first understood just as a means to channel more resources into civilian production. Then it was argued that the military-industrial sector could be an example for reorganizing civilian industry. Soviet economists argued that the defence industry could be used as a reserve of advanced technology to achieve the modernization of Soviet industry, enabling it to reach new levels of efficiency'.

There was an obvious gap between the degree of understanding of the conversion process and the very fact that military spending was fast decreasing. It was urgent to develop a coherent policy since military contracts were vanishing. Instead, there were crude experiments, ranging from civilian projects in the aerospace industry (even if they were as impractical as the suggested 1,000 ton passenger aircraft) to the production of titanium saucepans.

With the breakdown of the Soviet Union, conversion was still thought of as important but was to be implemented "through market forces", mainly by reducing the defence budget and most of the subsidies and by liberalizing the economy. Defence contracts were cut by 68 per cent in 1992 alone. However, these cuts did not translate instantly into a commensurate reduction of production. Sometimes it was technically impossible to adjust instantly but sometimes, too, enterprises believed that orders would be reinstated later or that their products had huge export potential.

Contrary to what has been frequently argued, military-related enterprises genuinely tried to convert and implement some kind of financial discipline. However, by the end of 1992, conversion was being blocked by a lack of general vision and insufficient investment, not to mention the quickly declining market, which was making domestic civilian production increasingly less attractive. The Government and enterprise managers alike tried to find a temporary alternative to conversion by boosting arms exports. While arms exports have been extremely disappointing from a Russian point of view, raw and semiprocessed materials produced in the military sectors have been widely exported. However Russian producers were soon confronted with declining prices and trade restrictions imposed by developed market economies. By mid1993, it was clear that boosting exports would not be the solution, even on a temporary basis. Fluctuations and hesitations which characterized the conversion policy none the less led to more realistic assessments of what could be achieved in this field.

Recently, the practice of maintaining extensive mobilization capacities has been abandoned, enabling the Government to focus its efforts on a reduced number of pure military enterprises. The process of dismantling is seen as inevitable and the Government will try to concentrate orders on the most efficient producers'.

There is also discussion of creating large industrial-financial conglomerates along the lines of the Chaebols of the Republic of Korea. Partial privatization would then be possible, even if the Government were to keep strict control over these groups. Cooperation with foreign companies is seen as extremely important for improving their technological abilities and gaining a foothold in foreign markets'.

Military contracts will certainly be concentrated on research and development, with some small-scale production for test purposes keeping production facilities alive. But the technological potential of military-industrial companies is also to be used in rebuilding some civilian activities, such as transportation, energy, telecommunications and health.

There is probably now a large consensus that there is no alternative to conversion and restructuring. Yet the lack of a common approach within government is still one of the worst problems plaguing this process.

STAGES IN THE CONVERSION PROCESS IN THE SOVIET UNION AND THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION

A nucleus of 200 to 400 enterprises is to be preserved at any cost out of an initial population of 600 defense specialised enterprises, as they are seen as the core of the industrial-technological potential of the country. These enterprises would concentrate on military contracts but simultaneously maintain civilian production capacities Such a policy would certainly entail production concentration on some areas and the closure of redundant facilities.

Conversion without government intervention

Shifting human and material resources from a defence-related to a civilian activity can be done either at the plant level or it can be achieved through the closure of former military related plants accompanied by the expansion of the civilian sector. In both cases, the main impetus is decreasing demand for military items combined with an increasing demand for consumer products. Downsizing or closing military plants and selling part of their fixed capital would potentially free labour and capital for use in civilian activities. Once the economy had started to recover, the demand for civilian goods, which was suppressed for so long, would encourage enterprises to invest accordingly. Any rise of unemployment, as defence plants shed labour, could be expected to be temporary.

In theory, it would seem as if no government intervention should be needed to implement conversion. In other words, the same kind of policies advocated by some for developed market economies should be sufficient: the Government should assure flexibility in both labour and capital markets, institute training or retraining programmes and give transitory support to enterprises where necessary.

However, such a view implies some specific conditions that are largely absent in the economies in transition. First, growth in demand for civilian goods is needed. Second, the down-sizing or closing of plants should take place without inducing a depression, either at the national or local level, which in turn presupposes that unemployment benefits are high enough to cushion the income contraction from the massive scale of lay-offs that corresponds to the large size of the defence industry. Third, the closing of plants should not seriously affect non-military producers: subcontractors and suppliers should be able to switch quickly to new lines of production or to find new markets.

In the absence of these conditions, closing or down-sizing military plants could induce a domino effect, with the initial closings causing a depression at the national or local level, which would in turn reduce opportunities to engage in civilian production, and generate a chain of bankrupcies. Historical experience with some backward and redundant smoke-stack branches in developed market economies is indeed that direct State government intervention is neededm

Microeconomics of conversion

An enterprise faces many threats in the transitory phase boxetween the end of government military contracts and the development of new activities. The threat here is not necessarily insolvency, but illiquidity. Any delay in implementing the change to civilian production for technical reasons or reasons not necessarily related to a specific enterprise could create an illiquidity trap. Even an efficient enterprise with a backlog of orders could collapsem This is particularly true as the balance between internal and external financing would probably shift towards external financing. If financial markets are not yet well developed, specific arrangements have to be made with the banking sector. It is also extremely important to clear the enterprise balance sheet before beginning the conversion, as the financial burden of old accumulated debts could jeopardize the whole process. Whatever the exact arrangements made to void old debts while still avoiding a moral hazard problem, they usually imply a good deal of state intervention.

The potential for successful conversion would be enhanced if the technologies at hand are dual use or at least applicable to some civilian production lines. Lateral technological transfer, that is, diffusion of the technologies or knowledge between industrial branches or enterprises, can be effected through licensing, merger, take-over or joint-venture creation.* This, however, requires the existence of well-defined property rights. Conversion still needs investment in both human and material capital, through internal retraining programmes. modification of production lines and acquisition of new machine-tools. The firm's internal flexibility, its ability to achieve quickly and efficiently a reallocation of internal resources, is a decisive factor.

Searching for new partners and contracting to set up new production lines takes time. Prohibitive transaction costs could force the converting enterprise towards technical internalization, ultimately jeopardizing its competitiveness.

Specific features of the defence-related industries within the centrally planned economy

Defence-related enterprises in economies in transition enjoyed a higher position on priority lists than -pure" cil ilian enterprises. Even if in the former Soviet Union the defence sector was not completely insulated from deficiencies in the civilian one, its industrial equipment was of a higher quality and more modern.* However, these advantages do not translate automatically into greater flexibility. To be higher on a priority list of planners is equivalent to paying a lower price for a given resource, which in turn encourages wastage rather than productive efficiency.* Indeed, defence-related enterprises were certainly more capable than civilian ones, but not necessarily more efficient.a

Industrial equipment that is highly specialized technologically, as in the Soviet defence industn. could be a liability as far as conversion towards completely different production lines is concerned. The technological basis matters only when civilian products are already technologically close to military ones. or if the enterprise was producing dual-use components.

The very nature of the technological culture that had developed in a particular defence enterprise also set it apart from other enterprises.* Technological culture describes here the core of tacit and collective knowledge accumulated through the life of the enterprise; it amounts mainly to an unwritten internal history of the enterprise's record of success and failure. More frequently than not, the Soviet technological culture in defence-related enterprises appears to be geared towards capabilities at any cost, or towards achievements in production not necessarily linked to achievements in efficiency.*

As each enterprise can be summed up as an organization resulting from trade-offs between transaction and organizational costs, the very nature of the informational environment played a major role in the development of defencerelated enterprises under centrally planning.* In an environment of shortages and quality deficiencies, they had to achieve levels of capability similar to those of enterprises in developed market economies. This situation led to the development of specific organizational skills that are probably redundant in a transition econorn.si Moreover, the culture of secrecy, which was so important in the defence sector, can put an enterprise at a disadvantage when openness and ability to develop relations with new partners is needed.


CONDITIONS FOR SUCCESSFUL CONVERSION

The conversion process is rarely pure conversion, meaning that a firm completely switches its production from one line to another, or pure diversification, meaning that two or more lines are pursued simultaneously.

The choice between conversion and diversification

Diversification allows for the retention of a secure technological and industrial basis, which could be used in the future for military production, while rigid conversion entails some measure of irreversibility, which would make a return to military production slower and more expensive. Rigid conversion would frequently mean a drastic reduction of military production capacities, with the survival of only a small nucleus. Thus it implies both a very strong political hand and the knowledge that the process would not have to be reversed in a short time. Diversification would certainly generate a reduction of military production capacities, but the nucleus would be much larger, and the potential for a future rise in military production (the so-called mobilization potential) would be both much better and much quicker. Diversification would be the better choice when political uncertainties are high.

Diversification would also probably reduce and smooth internal tensions in the converted firm, as accumulated knowledge is not instantly devalued. Status and occupations are less directly challenged by the diversification option than by rigid conversion. From a management point of view, the diversification option is certainly the one that can be implemented with a lower risk of internal conflicts as it allows workers and engineers alike to adjust progressively to new realities. On the other hand, it is clear that diversification could trap the conversion process in a conservative approach unable to produce results in the time needed.

But the mix is also influenced by economics. In a rigid conversion process, destruction of collective knowledge accumulated through productive organizations is taken for granted, even if it is hoped that new knowledge will be accumulated in new organizations. In diversification, what matters is the survival of some collective knowledge. The choice of conversion versus diversification implies that it is thought that a large part of formerly accumulated knowledge is no longer relevant in the new situation. This can be true when facing a major technological change. Diversification, on the other hand, makes it possible to reduce the risk level and soften the adaptation shock. It enables the enterprise to gradually implement an internal restructuring process, reducing somewhat the instantaneous demand for new investment. If some "efficiency" assets, such as marketing skills, are underdeveloped, a strategy of diversification allows for the progressive learning of such skills. However, to be a viable strategy, diversification implies a continued commitment to military demand.52 A diversification strategy could easily be jeopardized if the diversified sector were seen as a junior sector by the top management, while pure conversion would focus all energy on the conversion process by sending the message that there is no alternative.

Defence industries in the economies in transition share with the civilian sector low productivity by the standards of the developed market economies: they possess very little competitive advantage (except in a few technological niches), and they are notoriously overstaffed.P Low labour costs play a role only in a few labour-intensive industries.54 By contrast, prospects for science-intensive sectors, even if more limited in scale, seem more promising. Yet even when state-of-theart technologies are available, they are rarely applicable for civilian production. The complementary marketing skills necessary are often absent.%

Although defence conversion undoubtedly represents a daunting challenge, it is by no means doomed to failure. The conditions for successful conversion already exist in many cases in the economies in transition, although not all of these conditions can be expected to be met at the same time. Nevertheless, for success in converting defence-related enterprises, a good deal of coordination is work, and between decisions made at the macroand the micro-economic levels. For example, dilution of responsibilities and uncertainties about ownership can plague the conversion process.


The overall economic background for the defence sector's transformation

Recent developments have confirmed that, to be successful, the conversion process in the economies in transition depends critically on an increasing demand for civilian goods. As far as the Russian Federation is concerned, domestic demand would certainly play the major role as foreign markets cannot absorb a significant proportion of Russian defence-related production, even for raw materials such as metals. The relevance of domestic demand is certainly less acute for smaller countries and/or countries where the share of defence-related sector in industrial production has been significantly lower than in the Russian Federation.

Given these macroeconomic conditions, enterprises need a stable and robust financing system to prevent them from falling into illiquidity during the restructuring phase. Debt consolidation and long-term credits are required.

A stable system of rules, that is property rights definition and implementation, is even more important than the privatisation process itself. "Who owns what" and -who is in charge of what" are questions, the right answers to which are absolutely critical for developing economic incentives. From this point of view it is doubtful that the current stage of Russian privatization could give birth to the kind of corporate governance that is needed.51

Enterprises that are to be maintained should be put on the same footing as potential competitors. They cannot expect to restructure and be competitive if they are burdened by providing social services, such as child care, health care, housing and so forth, as they did in the past. Finally, government has to produce the information needed for midto long-term corporate guidance. Here, a credible industrial policy can be a considerable asset, as demonstrated by historical experiences in Japan, the Republic of Korea and Western Europe.P

The impact of progress in transition

In general, progress in defence conversion and diversification depends to a crucial extent on the stage of economic transition. In countries where transition is the most advanced and where considerable progress has already been achieved in macroeconomic stabilization, the priority can be reoriented towards enterprise restructuring in general and defence conversion in particular. In turn, the ability to maintain and advance stabilization achievements enables these countries to pay more attention to the social consequences of conversion. In countries at an earlier stage of transition, where macroeconomic instability remains a severe problem, the priority is hardly on restructuring. Even if this issue appears to be high on the political agenda, there is very little these countries can currently achieve in this respect and institution-building is now emerging as a key point for any viable transition strategy.s

If a quick move towards transition can be decisive for the conversion process, sticking to inflexible policies could lead to such high unemployment and social tensions as to jeopardize the transition itself.

Although the available indicators are by no means comprehensive and must be interpreted with caution, they show that countries that have made the most progress towards transition (namely the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland and Slovakia) are more likely to embark upon conversion/restructuring with success than, for example, the Russian Federation, whose progress has been slower!' Similarly, the Russian Federation is more likely to make progress in the field of defence conversion than is a country such as Ukraine.

Two countries, the Russian Federation and Slovakia, which a few years ago faced almost identical conversion problems, now find themselves in radically different situations: the strong rebound in economic growth in Slovakia, which took place in 1994 (and which is likely to continue), has to some extent alleviated the pains of defence conversion. On the other hand, the conversion problems in Hungary and the Czech Republic were less acute than in Slovakia or the Russian Federation, not to mention Ukraine. Defence-related industrial sectors were relatively smaller in the first two countries and usually specialized in high-quality components. Moreover, Hungary was already engaged in a process of marketization well before its actual transition began.

Restructuring and privatization

To date, many defence enterprises have been privatized, but the privatization process can be effective only if it modifies the behaviour of the firm to make it compatible with the key features of the market economy.s

In the transition economies, defence conversion is frequently associated with financial restructuring (asset liquidation and recontracting of non-performing loans). I2 Most of these enterprises would not survive if their fate were left to market forces. However, if they are not in too difficult a situation, they may prove viable when properly restructured. Strategies of diversification by way of integrating with civilian enterprises, as pursued in developed market economies, are rarely feasible in the countries in transition because of the lack of financial resources and the current structure of the market. Therefore, privatization that is not undertaken as an end in itself but rather to effect an improvement in the enterprise's efficiency is crucial for successful conversion.

Moreover, in most of the defence enterprises in the economies in transition the State is still a shareholder. If they are to be privatized, they must be restructured first. This raises the issue of who ought to perform the function of corporate governance during the transition period. State governance can be exercised through different institutions. 63 The Russian Federation, Ukraine and Slovakia assign control of defence industries to the sector ministry, Poland to the finance ministry and Hungary to a holding company. However, weak state authority and further weakening of state legitimacy through budget nonpayments, critically undermine the processes of control and supervision. If illdesigned and ill-implemented, privatization could end in the creation of "nobody" enterprises linked to "nobody" banks, with an ownership overlap that makes any credit discipline difficult to enforce.

ELEMENTS OF A SUCCESSFUL CONVERSION STRATEGY

It is now obvious that the conversion process will not give birth to the peace dividend in a short time. Although protracted and painful, this process is an absolute necessity for the economic and social stability of the economies in transition. In spite of all the difficulties mentioned above, there are some successes, which show the importance of public policies for any conversion process. Macroeconomic conditions, including stable or increasing demand for ciN ilian products, reliable, ready and cheap access to new markets and institutional conditions, such as stable rules and well-defined property rights are crucial. Success also depends on such microeconomic factors as internal flexibility, low transaction costs and an efficient financing system. Macroeconomic and institutional policies could create the right environment for microeconomic derision-making. Moreover, when markets are imperfect or temporarily unreliable, interventionist public policies are called for through subsidies and budget policies which seek to channel microeconomic actions into specific directions. 16 In the conversion process, there will always be a mix between these two groups of policies.

Direct Western capital involvement

Most of the former defence enterprises are in urgent need of a strategic investor to supply working capital, help improve quality and provide a distribution and service network in export markets. More often than not, direct investment from Western companies seems to present a real chance that the most advanced areas of the defence enterprises of the economies in transition can develop without being strangled by international competition.

Nevertheless, direct investment is in essence opportunistic and very few areas are of real interest to companies from developed market economies. Its scope is quite limited because the former defence industry does not promise quick returns and high margins compared with, say, trading ventures or where substantial returns can be obtained from the capacity to charge high hard currency prices with low local costs, such as for hotels. Usually, those enterprises that decide to invest in the equity of the former defence enterprises are those that are prepared to incur a short-term sacrifice in the hope of a potential longterm gain. Foreign involvement, either through direct investment or other means, has been critical in the few success stories, particularly in the former Soviet Union (see box XIII.4).56


 JOINT VENTURES IN THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION'S DEFENSE INDUSTRY

FINANCING REMAINS ONE OF THE MOST DIFFICULT ASPECTS of conversion. State assistance in the form of direct financing and low-interest credits has not been at the level required and is not likely to be increased, owing to the financial difficulties facing the Russian Government. Arms exports, which nominally generated as much as $30.8 billion for the Soviet Union in 1987, are not the solution. Because of the lack of a developed banking system in the Russian Federation, the ability of enterprises to obtain the required capital in the domestic market is still very limited. Even if the privatization of the military-industrial sector is completed, the newly created financial institutions will not invest much in the former defence enterprises. Therefore international private and public assistance is considered by some observers a crucial source of finance for the conversion and overall restructuring of the Russian defence industry, just as it is for the Russian Federation's transition to a market economy. In addition to being an important financing source, foreign partners bring technical expertise to such critical areas of a market economy as management, marketing, sales and distribution.

In 1993, more than 300 joint ventures involving Russian defence enterprises produced a total output of approximately $500 million.' The number of such projects is constantly growing. The largest and the most successful joint-venture projects are in the aerospace sector. In a highly publicized joint venture between Moscow's Khrunichev Enterprise and the United States-based Motorola, Khrunichev will provide launch services for communication satellites used in Iridium, Motorola's global telecommunications network. Smaller projects manufacture machine tools, medical instruments and diagnostic equipment and consumer electronics.

Until some time ago, a major obstacle to foreign investment was the state-owned status of most defence enterprises. The 1992 Defence Industry Conversion Act legalized the right of defence enterprises to actively participate "in foreign economic activities including joint ventures."' Since 1993, the Russian Government has concentrated its efforts on accelerating the privatization of its military-industrial complex.

The sheer size of military enterprises has kept foreign investors away. The solution was to break up the enterprises. For example, the Polaroid Corporation's joint venture making circuit boards at the Signal plant in Obninsk employs only 120 of the enterprise's 5,000 workers.' The social infrastructure of such enterprises, which includes housing, clinics and hospitals, as well as educational and recreational facilities, is still a liability for the Russian military-industrial complex. Divesture of these social assets is beginning by transferring many of them to local authorities to operate. However, the lack of local funding needed to maintain the transferred assets hinders the success of the process.

At the enterprise level, it used to be a common belief among Russian defence experts and directors that the advanced technology and highly skilled labour force would attract developed market economy investors seeking investment opportunities in the Russian Federation. Most technologies, however, had no commercial application and the majority of Russian engineers were so narrowly specialized that they needed retraining with a focus on market-oriented practices. Contrary to Russian managers' hopes that their plants would serve as assets in negotiating joint ventures with foreign partners, most developed market economy experts regard these facilities as poorly laid out, with a disorganized manufacturing flow, and unsafe.' Moreover, for many foreign business representatives it was better to start with a "green field" than to make the massive capital investment to update the existing plant.

The joint venture between the St. Petersburg Leninets factory, once a producer of radars and other military technology, and the Gillette company to make razor blades illustrates some of the points behind joint ventures. The Leninets factory was one of the first Russian defence enterprises to form a joint venture with a foreign partner. The contract was negotiated in 1991 and the first line of razor blades was produced in the spring of 1993.


 What distinguishes this factory from other defence enterprises is its management's commitment to market reforms and its ability to adapt quickly to new economic conditions in the country. After the first defence cuts were announced in 1989, Leninets started looking for new opportunities. During the Soviet era all plants producing consumer goods were under the control of the Ministry of Light Industry. When this was dissolved, major factories across the Russian Federation were offered the chance to take over thousands of small enterprises. Many defence plants refused the offer but Leninets obtained dozens of enterprises. Leninets now controls 35 subsidiaries and 70 smaller cooperatives, which manufacture products from floor cleaners to radio sets and to a large extent now determinethecompany'sfuture.*

The management of the enterprise also understood very early in the process that joint ventures with foreign partners were crucial to obtaining the latest technology and also management and marketing skills, as well as to bringing their products to the international market. By the end of 1997, the new joint venture is expected to turn out up to 800 million razors and blades to sell abroad for hard currency and at home for roubles. Rouble-based sales will require some time to yield a profit for Gillette considering the limited purchasing power of Russian consumers at the present time; however, the United States company looks forward to long-term investment returns. Leninets has also formed joint ventures with companies in Finland, Hungary, India, Norway and Tunisia.

Similar selection criteria were used by the Caterpillar Company in its search for a Russian partner to jointly produce hydraulic excavators and tractors. After three years of exploring the Russian market, Caterpillar finally picked the St. Petersburg Kirov factory for its "excellent marketing program" and strong support system developed at the works for this joint venture.

Another factor which makes it much easier to invest in a Russian defence enterprise is the possibility of selling the joint venture's products internationally so as to generate a ready source of hard currency profits from the start. The Polaroid joint venture "Svetozor" was developed to assemble cameras to be sold on the international market. Although some of these Polaroid products are also sold within the Russian Federation, this has been a less active part of its operations and may change in the future. Some foreign companies find Western buyers for their Russian joint-venture products even prior to beginning production in the Russian Federation.g

While the main role of government in facilitating joint ventures with foreign companies is to build an adequate economic and legislative environment, defence enterprises need to demonstrate the ability to adapt to the new economic conditions in the country. Enterprises must diversify production, eliminate or suspend idle capacity and start cooperating on the basis of mutual economic benefit. Changes in management thinking and behaviour are critical to the process of transformation to a market economy.

 Developing efficiency assets

The defence enterprises must achieve their "cultural revolution" because criteria that are absolutely essential in the civilian market are not determinant in the military market.P The problem is more acute in the economies in transition, since it was reinforced in the past by a general atmosphere of secrecy and the lack of rules that govern a market economy. If the former military enterprises follow their own way without any clear economic aim or sales possibilities, it could be economically disastrous. But still too often, they focus exclusively on the technical feasibility of conversion and less on marketability and economic efficiency. Managers refer to the technical potential for conversion with an obvious lack of consumer-oriented thought and rarely perceive the fundamental differences between the military and civilian markets. However, this attitude is changing as reform progresses.

Developing and financing a new social safety net

In the former socialist countries more than anywhere else enterprises fulfilled an explicit social function, which was not in principle undertaken within Western commercial firms. As a result, they provided a wide range of non-monetary benefits to workers that would normally have been the responsibility of the local administration or the government in a market economy.i. Social assets impose a tremendous financial burden on enterprises, especially in a situation in which they can barely survive. Therefore, enterprises need to transfer their social services in order to be able to compete efficiently in domestic or international markets. A few reasons justify this position. Social assets prevent potential investors, in particular foreign investors, from investing in equity because they fear the social liabilities. The burden represented by social assets distorts competition and hinders labour mobility, which is especially important in the current situation, where some of the mono-industrial regions are precisely those that offer the largest access to social benefits. This also deters effective restructuring since it absorbs resources which could be better used elsewhere.

The social assets give enterprises enormous bargaining power with central and local governments to obtain subsidies or credits. In other words, an attempt by government or local authorities to institute financial discipline may entail high social costs.

There is obviously no point in an enterprise divesting its social assets if it has to pay more in taxation to the municipality or the local government than it previously disbursed in direct costs. The absence of reform in housing or local administration systems would prevent enterprises from elaborating a strategy for divestment. Transferring services to local authorities if the closure of a company precipitates the collapse of tax revenues may well recreate the problem at the community level rather than at the enterprise level. Therefore, an effective tax system is necessary so that the cost of supporting social services may be borne by non-distorting taxes.

On the other side, taxes are needed to reduce the budget deficit and to allow for a dynamic public policy, especially for public investment in infrastructure such as transport and communications. Yet, there is a risk a that a rise in the tax burden, together with high inflation, will drive enterprises out of the legal economy.a The mix of sources of revenue finally decided upon can have important consequences for economic growth and has been the subject of much d iscussion.le

The creation of a social safety net, in particular a viable unemployment insurance programme, is of paramount importance for alleviating the burden currently borne by enterprises. Moreover, by disconnecting social protection from employment in a given enterprise, a social safety net would dramatically improve labour mobility.

 In the Russian Federation, a growing number of economic transactions already occur in the so-called "shadoweconomy".

Using the border effect

The very size of the Russian Federation produces booming local economies in certain frontier zones, such as St Petersburg (with the Nordic countries), the far eastern part of Siberia (because of the proximity to China, Japan and the Republic of Korea) or the fast growing regions such as Moscow. Here the socalled border effect can mix with a capital-city effect, which is also apparent in Warsaw, Prague and Budapest.

Booming local economies contribute to the success of conversion by way of strong civilian demand. Economic boom also helps the divestment of social assets as local authorities collect more taxes and the boom in the property market constitutes a strong incentive for the local administration to take over housing from enterprises. Conversely, regions or cities dominated by declining monoindustries, which do not benefit from a border effect", may face considerable problems. In such a situation, where the workforce and the population are virtually the same constituency, social services can be financed neither by the enterprise (through reduced wages) nor the local administration (through increased taxation). In that case, the consequences of divesting would be disastrous.

CONCLUSION

From one point of view, the end of the cold war ran be seen as the peaceful end of completely one-sided competition betu een the military-economic power of the United States and its allies, primarily the developed market economies, and the former Soviet Union and its allies. For example, the size of the Soviet Union's economy in 1983 was estimated at about a third of that of the United States, and that of the Soviet Union and its allies 16 per cent of that of the developed market economies.

The peaceful end of this competition was a good in itself. It would probably be over-optimistic to conclude that the lesson has finally been learned that strength does not come from the possession of weapons, but from a well-functioning socio-economic system. However, discussions of a peace dividend sure reflect the recognition that an opportunity is available to make more productive use of the resources that are released by disarmament. In many cases, this would indeed entail greater social spending.

For the Soviet Union to try to maintain a defence establishment that could compete with that of the United States and its friends and allies was to prove economically ruinous. The economy was simply too small. Reliance on exports to third countries to replace domestic orders was not a viable option in the long term. The shrinking of the Soviet defence establishment was inevitable. However, the Soviet defence industry had employed a number of highly skilled individuals who had helped it achieve some of its noted technical successes, especially in the field of space. Their release could only help the civilian economy. Moreover, the dismantling of the defence industry itself can be said to have helped cushion the negative impacts of the socio-economic transformation on the average citizen: the defence industries had excess stocks of raw materials that had been set aside for "surge capacity", and a foreign-exchange income came partly from their sale and partly from savings in related industries. Finally, the continuance of the previous socio-economic system would have led to continued costs to the people of the economies in transition: wastage of raw materials and labour in the inefficient production of unwanted goods and greater pollution. The longer the inevitable adjustment was postponed, the greater the costs would have been.

The end of the cold war enabled the developed countries to effect a permanent reduction in their military forces and defence industries. This was not accompanied by a drastic reordering of the socio-economic system and the decision on how best to allocate the resources that were released was normally left to the market. Governments did not feel that the reduction in military spending gave them an opportunity to effect a permanent increase in the share of non-defence government spending. Their decisions on how to adjust to reduced military spending had implications for third countries, which global econometric models suggest will be favourable over the longer run.

For the developing countries, the end of the cold war had various implications. Some countries, without their traditional supporter, felt more vulnerable. Others found that cooperation between the United States and the succcessor States of the Soviet Union contributed to a reduction in regional tensions. Although the picture is mixed, there are encouraging developments at the international level.

The international community has become increasingly aware that military spending can harm the socio-economic welfare of developing countries, in the same way as it harmed the economic potential of the former Soviet Union. It has a clear interest in preventing regional arms build-ups, particularly if these involve the development or acquisition of weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery. However, the costs and benefits of disarmament are not spread evenly and the international community could facilitate disarmament by helping spread them more evenly. Countries that do not have to go through prolonged structural adjustments to reallocate resources to non-military uses could alleviate similar problems in other countries and minimize the international adjustment costs by way of expansionary accommodating macroeconomic policies. Similarly, many suggestions have been made recently to provide stimuli to third countries, particularly in the developing world, to induce participation in coordinated reductions in military expenditure.

The end of the cold war means that these matters can now be tackled more easily, as the same eventual aim is accepted at the international level the reduction of military budgets and the use of the resources released for socioeconomic development in the context of a market economy that is more closely integrated in the world economy.


METHODS OF PRODUCTION

The World Economic and Social Survey 1994 reviewed the problem of long-term unemployment in developed and developing economies, paying separate attention to issues facing transitional economies.' The passage of another year has done nothing to dispel the idea that unemployment is a serious problem in many countries. In a number of countries, problems of long-term unemployment and underemployment, stagnating real wages and deteriorating income distributions have become more serious.

An important issue in the ongoing debate on the causes of these problems is the role of technological change. Technological change is a major source of economic growth and development, a "lever of riche8"2 allowing resources to be used more productively and new products and processes to be developed. Technological progress, however, does not always occur smoothly, nor does it occur without cost. The introduction and rapid dissemination of new technologies are often associated with substantial disruptions in pre-existing economic arrangements. With technological change on the rise, possible links between problems of unemployment and slow wage growth and the introduction and spread of new technologies have to be explored.

The pre:will chapter examines the impact of technological and organizational change on recent trends in labour and productivity, drawing conclusions that relate to policy debates in individual countries and internationally. The chapter concentrates on the largest developed market economies, which originate most technological innovations in the world and account for 95 per cent of global research and development (R&D) expenditures. Today, these nations are leading the world economy into a new teclmological era. A transformation in the technology embodied in physical capital, particularly information technology, is being ushered in alongside new skills embodied in human capital, and is affecting labour in nearly every economic sector.

At the same time, "disembodied technological change" is under way in the form of transformations in the organization of production, both within and between firms. At the societal level, most industrialized countries are grappling with inefficiencies in labour markets and in the iiiAilutions that support research and development, and are searching for new, more efficient arrangements.

In today's increasingly globalized economy, the potential for economic prosperity depends on technological, organizational and human capital innovations that enhance the productivity of every factor of production. Driven by global competition, firms are utilizing new technologies and managerial methods to boost productivity and economize on labour and all forms of capital machinery and equipment, inventories, and cash balances. Japan's successes, and those of the newly industrializing economies in Asia, indicate that both organizational and institutional factors and technological change are important to productivity and growth. Similarly, an examination of the automobile and data-processing industries demonstrates that both technological and organizational innovation can precipitate significant industrial transformations. These two industry studies also suggest that changes in methods of production affect where production is located internationally, and thus hold important implications for developing economies as well as for developed economies.

From a long-term perspective, today's technological and organizational developments have not advanced far enough to realize their full potential for growth and rising living standards. If history is any guide, the recent slow growth in productivity, output and incomes will be overcome only if greater labour productivity is complemented by increases in the productivity of capital, as the example of the long-term trends in the United States illustrates. This example also suggests that the restoration of profitability and improvement of living standards will require more than technological advances. The evolution of management within firms and socio-economic institutions is equally vital for long-term prosperity.

LABOUR AND TECHNOLOGY TODAY: THE DAWN OF A NEW ERA?

Today, all countries are undergoing striking technological shifts. Research and development (R&D) expenditures in the countries belonging to the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) rose from less than 1.9 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP) in 1975 to 2.4 per cent of GDP during the late 1980s. Many developing countries are also increasing their R&D expenditures. For example, the Republic of Korea projected that it would devote 3.5 per cent of its GDP to science and technology in 1995.3 Technological innovations are evident in the historic shift from manufacturing towards a greater role for services. Servicesector growth reflects, in part, technological developments and related new products in information, communication and financial services. Technological advances are an important aspect of international competition in rapidly growing technology-intensive industries, such as the computer industry, as well as in older industries, such as automobiles, where the technological content in the production process is rising.

Industrial change has also shifted occupational structures in the developed economies towards higher technology industries (see figure XIV.1), increasing the knowledge and skill-based content of jobs. The largest increases in employment have occurred in professional, technical, administrative and managerial occupations, while production workers, transportation workers and labourers declined across the board.. With these changes, high knowledgecontent jobs, including for scientists and engineers, are becoming a larger percentage of the labour force (see figure XIV.2).5

Despite the signs of rapid technological change in the industrial mix of the economy, and in recent surges in R&D, a standard measure of key inputs to technological change, indicators of technological improvement for the economy as a whole, such as total factor productivity (TFP), as well as the productivity of labour and of capital (see box XIV.1),, lowed markedly from the 1960s (see table XIV.1).

 PRODUCT1VTTY MEASURES THE AMOUNT OF INPUTS that are needed to produce a given level of output, and thus reflects the efficiency with which inputs are used. Three measures of productivity are presented in this chapter.

Total factor productivity (TFP) measures the ratio of output to an index of both capital and labour inputs, and thus reflects the overall increase in productive efficiency. TFP is generally measured by the residual method the difference between the rate of growth in output and the average rate of growth of inputs, weighted by shares of factor income.

TFP has been conventionally interpreted as a measure of the rate of technological change by assuming constant returns to scale a doubling of capital and labour inputs doubles output. In other words, any increase in output greater than that projected by constant returns to scale represents technical progress. In fact, TFP reflects not only technological innovation in the narrow sense, but also improvements in skills and/or motivation of the workforce, in management and organization, and the existence of increasing returns to scale, when fixed plant or labour overhead costs such as marketing and R&D are spread over a larger output..

In contrast to TFP, the productivity of labour and the productivity of capital commonly called single factor productivity measures provide information on the use of each major input to production. The productivity of labour measures output per unit of labour input. Similarly, capital productivity is the ratio of output to capital inputs

Because labour and capital productivity each concentrate on the productivity of one factor of production. these measures reflect changes in the amount of capital stock used by each worker (capital-labour ratio), as well as changes in overall productive efficiency. As seen in tables XIV.1 and XIV.2, increased labour productivity has often come about through increases in the capital-labour ratio. This substitution effect has simultaneously resulted in slower increases, and even declines, in the productivity of capital.

Measurement issues

Both the output and the input values used to calculate the productivity of labour, capital and TFP are subject to measurement and aggregation problems, which have generated a large literature and intensive debate.b

Two general problems in measuring output are, first, the difficulty that results from changes in the quality of output and, second, complications involved in measuring services. In some services, where output is difficult to measure, labour input data serve as a proxy for output, constraining changes in labour productivity to zero.

Labour input can be measured by employment or by the number of hours worked, to incorporate differences in the number of hours for full-time employees and the use of parttime workers. The number of worker hours provides a more precise measure of labour input. TFP and labour productivity trends do not change significantly when productivity is adjusted for labour hours. However, there are often differences in the size of the productivity gap between the United States and other developed countries, depending on whether labour input is measured by employees or hours.

Capital input can be calculated using a measure that is gross or net of the depreciation of the stock of fixed capital. Net fixed capital more accurately represents the amount of capital in use. Gross fixed capital measures were used in this chapter for comparisons among countries since net measures are not available in the database used. The trend in the productivity of capital in the current period is negative based on both net and gross measures of capital stock analysed in this chapter for the United States (see tables XIV.1 and XIV.2).

Comparisons of the level of productivity among countries can reflect differences in measurement conventions, as well as differences owing to the exchange rate used to convert inputs and outputs from different currencies into a common currency. Thus, for example, differences between some studies are due to the method used to calculate purchasing power parities.

The productivity of labour grew, but at a slower pace than during the early post-war era, only beginning to improve moderately in the 1980s and 1990s (see table XIV.1). During this period, labour productivity in manufacturing recovered somewhat, while the productivity of labour in services did not.6 Recorded productivity in the service sector has historically lagged behind manufacturing, owing in part to measurement difficulties. Where productivity can be measured, gains frequently reflect the spread of new information technologies and product innovations. For example, labour productivity in United States commercial banking, as measured by the number of transactions per hours worked, has grown substantially since 1980, registering a 4.4 per cent annual average growth rate between 1980 and 1993, as compared with 0.8 per cent annual growth from 1970 to 1980 (see figure XIV.3).
At the same time, growth in the productivity of capital for the OECD area was negative over the past 25 years, with the worst performance during the period 1973-1978. The productivity of capital recovered somewhat in the 1980s. However, by 1992, grow Ili in the productivity of capital had not yet turned positive.

Recently, many analysts have attempted to resolve the apparent paradox het ween the everyday perception of rapid technical change in the economy that It ident in data on industrial change and R&D activity and the slow progress to technological and organizational change and analyzing their relation to labour trends.

When the post-war era is viewed from the standpoint of long-term change, a periodization emerges that has led some observers to conclude that the late 1980s and early 1990s may herald the initial stages of a new technological and organizational era.8

Data on total factor productivity for the United States suggest that three periods can be distinguished during the past 120 years.' During the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, TFP growth was slow. This flat trend was followed by a long-term rise from the 1920s through the 1950s. During this period, TFP growth was faster than in the 1950s and 1960s, a period that is often described as a "golden era" of higher-than-average productivity growth. The third period, beginning in the postSecond World War era, returns to a slim. flat trend much like the one observed in the early twentieth century.

As shown in table XIV.2, a similar periodization can be seen in other key economic variables that affect technical change and the distribution of income the profit rate, labour cost (real wage rate), the productivity of capital, the product it ity of labour and the capital-labour ratio."


There is a striking similarity between the behaviour of the five variables set forth in table XIV.2 above at the end of the nineteenth century and at the end of the twentieth century. During the first stage, which begins in 1869 (the first year for which data are available after the Civil War) and extends through 1912, and the third stage (1951-1989), profitability declined, as did the productivity of capital. Meanwhile, real wage rates and labour productivity grew at a pace below their long-term (1869-1989) trend. In both periods, the profit rate sank to historic lows.

During the first stage. declining profitability had two consequences. First, a high degree of instability was created in the economy in the late nineteenth century (as can be seen in the movements of the capacity utilization rate). while the institutional ability to manage the economy was primitive. Secondly, increases in labour costs were maintained at a rate below their historical trend, as firms sought to reduce costs to improve profitability. The pace of the increase in labour costs was still sufficient to induce some labour-saving technological change and thereby increase the capital-labour ratio. During this period, the technical and managerial progress that did occur manifested itself in increases in the productivity of labour below its long-term trend. The slow rate of increase in labour productivity, combined with declines in the productivity of capital, did not yield improvements sufficient to offset the decline in the rate of profit.

The declining profitability in the first period ultimately exerted pressure for significant technological and managerial transformations, ushering in the second stage (1912-1951). During this second period, in contrast to the first and third periods, a strong acceleration of technical progress was combined with major transformations in the management of firms and of the economy as a whole, which allowed for an exceptionally rapid growth of the productivity of both labour and capital.

The sweeping acceleration of technological and organizational change during this period was by no means a smooth process, and it took some 40 years to complete. The acceleration of technological change began in the 1910s and 1920s and resulted in great heterogeneity in technology among firms, rendering large fractions of the capital stock obsolete. At the same time, important modifications in organization occurred. They included the introduction of mass production, the rise of managerial and clerical personnel, greater autonomy of management from owners in operations and technology, and the separation of many traditional finance functions from the management of the firm. This managerial transformation was paralleled by the gradual emergence of new institutions designed to exert control over macroeconomic instability, including new centralized procedures for the issuance of money. The separation of financial management from firm management led to the erection of a new financial structure connected to the stock market and to a new banking system.

This heterogeneity of technology, coupled with the emergence of a new financial structure, added considerable fragility to the economy, which was not sufficiently offset by economic policy, and culminated dramatically in the Great Depressionm During the Great Depression, a sizable fraction of outdated capital stock was written off. The combined experience of the New Deal and the Second World War confirmed the need for better regulation of the economy, undermined and then thorougly transformed the old institutional framework.

The second stage indicates that the dynamics between profitability and productivity go both ways. Stimulated by the low profitability at the end of the first stage, technological and organizational innovation led to joint increases in capital and labour productivity which, in turn, restored profitability in the subsequent era and "relaxed" the antagonism between labour costs and the profit rate, allowing for profit rates and wages to increase simultaneously. In this period, wage rates increased at a rate faster than the long-term average.

The United States economy emerged from the Second World War with a historically high profit rate, which was the result of two equally striking movements: (a) a major transformation in technology and organization, and (b) an exceptionally large Iluctuation in the capacity utilization rate from the Great Depression through the Second World War. The United States had also gained experience in economic stabilization. By the 1950s, freed from the burden of obsolete capital, the United States harvested the benefits of the transformations in technology, management and economic stabilization that had taken place over a 40-year period. After the Second World War, investment surged and marginal innovations in technology and management and economies of scale realized the potential of the new methods of production.

As the wave of fundamental technical progress and of transformations in management that characterized the second era came to fruition, international competition began to increase, initiating a new downward trend in the profit rate, and the beginning of a third period (1951-1989). Declining profit rates continued despite the 1960s bulge that mirrors the high rates of capacity utilization of those years. International competition played an important role in the decline as other countries became more competitive with the United States and international trade and investment barriers fell. The oil shocks of the 1970s came during a period when profitability was already trending downward.

As during the first period, the return to a downward historical trend in profitability was painful. By the 1970s, greater economic instability than in the prior two decades was observed. Low levels of profitability led firms to adopt price responses that were reflected in a new type of inflation, which persisted even with low levels of growth ("stagflation"), and to exert downward pressure on labour costs. An inability to finance state expenditures and balance the budget became entrenched by the 1980s, as the Government relaxed the tax burden it had earlier imposed on firms. United States firms adopted low-wage strategies to increase profitability and face international competition. Slower increases in labour costs reduced the pressure on companies to substitute capital for labour and a new slow-down in labour productivity growth began in the 1970s. Signs of recovery were still weak in the 1980s.

The current period appears reminiscent of the transition between the first and second stages, when declining returns ultimately brought forth a new technical and institutional era. By the late 1980s and early 1990s, there were some indications of a recovery in technological change, productivity picked up somewhat and profitability improved significantly. There are also many indications that long-term changes in institutions are still under way, as the institutions that came to fruition in the post-war era are being dismantled. However, the downward pressure on labour costs is still strong and new institutions have not fully emerged.

Although this long-term portrait has been constructed from United States data, similar patterns since the Second World War are apparent across the developed countries. Since the 1960s, profitability declined in the developed countries, although there were some significant improvements in the late 1980s and early 1990s. The productivity growth of all factors of production also slowed and many countries experienced a period of slow growth. Over the past 15 years, many developed countries underwent recessions more wrenching than any experienced since the Great Depression. Even Japan is coping with the longest recession of its post-war history.

During this period of macroeconomic instability and globalization, international competition among firms became more intense and fuelled the introduction of new technological innovations. New technologies have, on balance, created jobs and enhanced the standard of living. Modifications of the organization of work towards flexible specialization have also come about. At the level of the economy, established methods for organizing and regulating markets are being questioned in many countries.

From the long-term perspective, these dynamics suggest that a new era of technological and institutional change may have begun in the world economy. In this context, recent surges in R&D may have not yet realized their full potential because they have not been fully generalized and new information technologies have yet to realize full economies of scale. Moreover, these new technologies are still being employed within traditional managerial and institutional relations.

Although the overall trends among the developed economies are similar, there have been important differences among countries in the outcomes for labour. The next section describes the results for labour in Japan, the United States and western Europe and then looks at some of the reasons underlying the differing results comparative productivity patterns, investment, labour market organization, both within and between firms, and product market regulations.t2

Global economic changes have produced markedly different labour outcomes in different countries and regions during the 1980s and 1990s (see table XIV.3). Japan maintained unemployment rates below 3 per cent (though they rose throughout the period), while real compensation increased at an average annual rate of nearly 2 per cent from 1974 to 1994. Wage dispersion, measured by the ratio of the wage of the ninetieth percentile earner to the bottom tenth percentile earner, increased only slightly during the 1980s.

In contrast, the United States maintained unemployment rates that were higher than Japan's. Unemployment in the United States averaged 4.9 per cent during the period 1960-1973, increased in the 1970s and 1980s before declining to an average rate of 6.2 per cent in the late 1980s and early 1990s and dropping below 6 per cent in 1994. More telling, the growth of total compensation per employee in real terms stagnated in the United States, rising a mere 0.3 per cent from the 1970s to the present. By 1992, the median weekly wage was still below its 1972 level (in 1992 dollars) even in the service sector, which has grown rapidly.* In addition, United States wage equality deteriorated. Wage dispersion as defined above was higher than in the other six major industrialized countries in 1979, and escalated in the 1980s, thereby reversing a trend towards greater equality experienced in earlier decades.14

Western Europe suffered more severe unemployment than the United States. Unemployment rates doubled from the 1970s to the 1980s, then continued to rise to an average 9.4 per cent in the 1990s. However, real total compensation rates in most western European countries rose much faster than in the United States, although these gains were on average smaller than in Japan. For example, Germany posted an average annual growth rate of 1.3 per cent in real total compensation rates per employee (compared to 0.3 per cent in the United States and 1.8 per cent in Japan). On the whole, western European countries also maintained a more narrow wage dispersion than the United States, with little erosion in the 1980s. In some countries, including France, Germany and Italy, the dispersion between the wage rate of the ninetieth percentile and the tenth percentile earner actually shrank during the 1980s.15

Productivity growth

Productivity growth fell throughout the developed economies beginning in the 1960s (see table XIV.3). However, Japan and western Europe maintained higher labour productivity growth overall than did the United States from the 1970s until the present.

These economy-wide differences in labour productivity growth reflect the differences in labour cost increases. Thus, the substantial slow-down in the growth of labour costs in the United States resulted in less cost pressure to move towards labour-saving technological change, and labour productivity increased slowly. The relative inability of the United States to make gains in labour productivity in turn resulted in continued pressure by rums to keep compensation costs from rising. In contrast, Japan's faster increases in wage rates maintained pressure for labour-saving technical change and resulted in greater labour productivity gains, allowing firms to continue granting wage increases.

Because labour productivity increased in Japan and western Europe more rapidly than in the United States, they achieved significant catch-up to the United States level of labour productivity for the total economy and for manufacturing.* Some productivity measures show other countries completely caught up to the United States overall, and find that labour productivity in Japan is now higher than that of the United States in a number of manufacturing industries such as cars, auto parts, consumer electronics and steel.* However, as in other countries, Japan's gains did not take place equally across the economy. For example, in food processing, Japan lags far behind the United States, with labour productivity only 33 per cent of the United States level. Japan's productivity in services has grown slowly, resulting in much less catchup to United States levels in industries such as general merchandise retailing and telecommunications.

Western European economies made substantial gains relative to the United States in labour productivity.* Germany, for example, reached 96 per cent of the United States manufacturing productivity level by 1979 and 70 per cent for the total economy. By 1990, the labour productivity gap between Germany and the United States for the total economy was even smaller 75.2 per cent. However, the manufacturing productivity gap widened over the 1980s, making the 1980s the first post-war decade in which Germany's manufacturing productivity did not improve relative to that of the United States.

Western Europe's productivity performance for the total economy in relation to its employment record reveals a major difference between the United States and western European mechanisms for coping with intensified competition. Because western Europe increased labour productivity for the total economy relative to the United States, and just about matched United States GDP growth rates, western Europe created less new employment than the United States. This held true even during the 1980s, when the growth of productivity in western European countries slowed further while in the United States and Japan it picked up.

The comparative pattern of the productivity of capital among developed countries was the reverse of that observed for labour productivity growth (see table XIV.1). Instead of being the laggard, the United States maintained a lead over both Japan and western Europe in the growth of the product iN ity of capital for each period. From 1960 to 1973, the average annual growth in the productivity of capital for the United States was slightly positive (0.2 per cent) while it was clearly negative for both Japan and Germany. Capital productivity turned negative in the United States in the 1970s and 1980s.

Thus, although capital was substituted for labour in Japan and western Europe at a faster rate than in the United States, producing better growth in the productivity of labour, both Japan and western Europe registered stronger declines in the productivity of capital than did the United States.

The combined effect of changes in the productivity of labour and of capital resulted in Japan and western Europe outpacing the United States rates of TFP growth throughout the past three decades. The relatively more positive result (slower decline) in United States capital productivity growth did not offset the poorer performance of the United States in labour productivity. As a result, United States TFP growth has remained below the OECD average and below its major competitors.

During the 1980s, the improvements in labour and capital productivity in Japan and the United States resulted in stronger TFP growth. The slow-down in the productivity of labour in western Europe during the 1980s was not offset sufficiently by its slight improvement in capital productivity, and thus TFP in western Europe dropped slightly from the 1970s to the 1980s.

The role of investment

The higher rates of labour productivity in Japan and western Europe were in part due to differences in investment in fixed capital, allowing those countries to upgrade their stock of buildings and equipment and to increase the amount of capital per worker.

From 1974 to 1992, net investment in fixed capital as a share of GDP declined in all countries from their 1960s levels.lg However, net investment in Japan averaged 18.9 per cent of GDP on an annual average basis. This investment rate was consistently higher than that maintained by other developed countries, and helped ensure that Japan made greater gains in productivity.


In comparison, the net investment rate in the United States was 10.6 per cent of GDP, down from 12.8 per cent in the 1960s. Firms in the United States often sought to increase labour productivity by reducing employment rather than investing in new buildings and equipment. One study found that "successful" downsizers, that is, companies that reduced employment and increased productivity, contributed as much to manufacturing-sector productivity during the 1980s as plants that increased employment and productivity.s

The slow-down in western European labour productivity growth from the 1960s was due almost entirely to a pronounced slackening in the pace of capital investment. In major western European countries, net investment as a share of GDP was lower than in Japan during the period 1960-1973, and then fell sharply during the 1974-1992 period. For example, net investment in Germany declined from 16.9 per cent of GDP during the period 1960-1973 to 11.0 per cent in 1974-1992.

The relatively low United States investment rate resulted in increases in the amount of capital used per worker in Japan and western Europe in comparison with the United States. For the total economy. Japan moved from just 22 per cent of the United States capital-labour ratio in 1970 to 66 per cent by 1992. Japan's capital-labour ratio for the manufacturing sector also sustained the most rapid growth among the OECD countries, rising from 39 per cent of the United States level in 1970 to 69 per cent in 1988. Germany's capital-labour ratio for the total economy moved from 55 per cent in 1970 to the 1989 peak of 82 per cent of the United States levelm

Japan's concentration on investment also contributed to growth in GDP, thereby helping to maintain employment. In the 1980s, gross fixed capital formation made up 43 per cent of Japan's GDP growth.n In the United States, investment demand only contributed 21 per cent to GDP growth. The share of GDP growth accounted for by investment in western Europe was also much lower than in Japan 20 per cent in France, 21 per cent in Germany and ii per cent in Italy. Spain invested heavily, and 40 per cent of GDP growth was attributed to investment. However, in contrast to Japan, much of this demand was met through imports rather than through domestic production and, thus, Spain generated less domestic employment from investment than did Japan.

As with physical capital investment, Japan increased total public and private investment in R&D more rapidly than other developed countries during the 1980s, and now leads the world in the share of GDP devoted to R&D. The United States is second, as private sector civilian R&D has been growing rapidly while government expenditures have declined, and Germany is third. During the 1980s, patent applications in Japan also increased much faster than in other major OECD countries.n

Differences in the amount of expenditures that countries devote to military R&D have further influenced the relative commercial results from R&D expenditures. The United States has consistently devoted greater resources to military R&D than other developed countries. United States commercial results from R&D expenditures have been held back because of the high percentage of government spending on R&D devoted to military applications. The negative impact on the United States has grown because the spillover from military R&D into civilian technology has declined since the 1970s, as the nature of military demands seems to have shifted away from areas that have strong civilian applications. However, companies and Governments are increasingly investing in large-scale projects without the traditional military rationale.24 Perhaps as important as the increased expenditures on R&D, developed market economies are fundamentally transforming the organization of R& D.

Over the past century, technical progress has been transformed from a process achieved mainly by individual inventors who gained their skills largely through practical experience, into a professionalized process that takes place within an elaborate network of scientific and technical societies, universities, industrial research laboratories and government research labs. Today, collaboration between firms and between universities, government research institutes and industry is rising markedly through the establishment of new networks where. previously, relatively few existed. Funding for university research is becoming increasingly tied to partnerships with business. Cooperative industryuniversity centres, technology transfer centres and interdisciplinary centres are proliferating in every country. Equally important, collaboration between firms is undergoing substantial growth, particularly in leading R&D countries, as well as internationally. At the international level alone, inter-firm agreements for technology cooperation increased from 153 in the period 1973-1976 to 1,936 by 1985-1988. Moreover, joint ventures and joint R&D projects, which require the greatest degree of collaboration, accounted for more than 50 per cent of the agreements made in the late 1980s.

The R&D developments in Japan, the United States and western Europe reflect the different weaknesses that each seek to address within this general trend. Throughout the post-Second World War period, Japan concentrated on applying Western technology to industry and prospered from high within-firm R&D that is in part spurred by inter-firm no-poaching regulations. n However, firms, and universities, undertook relatively little basic scientific research. Today. Japan is seeking to promote basic research, increase cooperation between university and industry by means of competitive grants to joint teams, and become more integrated into international R&D networks. For example, between 1987 and 1990, 21 Japanese electronic firms established 33 new R&D centres outside Japan, of which 21 were located in the United States.

The United States is the major world scientific and technological power and leads in basic scientific research overall. However, United States firms have not been as successful in matching the ability of competitors to apply basic research to commercial products. Since the 1980s, the United States has begun to actively address this problem. Networks between universities and industry have been promoted and antitrust laws were liberalized to allow new consortia between firms to develop while financial support for civilian technologies (semiconductors, high-definition television, superconductivity, energy efficiency) grew. State Governments actively created new R&D centres and spawned venture funds to support high-technology companies. Thus, in 1980, 10 States sponsored programmes to stimulate innovation. By the late 1980s, 45 States had implemented a total of 270 programmes in technology development.n

The main obstacle facing western European countries is the relatively small size of each country's R&D capacity as compared with the United States and Japan. To address this problem. western European countries have vastl) increased international cooperation, in addition to promoting domestic linkages between academic research centres and firms and inter-firm cooperation.

The number of cooperative agreements between firms of different European countries has grown substantially in the past 15 years and is supported by European Union policy.a For example, efforts such as JESSI and the EUREKA programme have established many new collaborations. In addition, hundreds of new programmes in information technology and biotechnology and new materials have been launched by European Commission programmes in these areas.

Labour market organization within and between Arms

Alongside investment, the organization of labour markets has played an important role in Japan's relative growth and productivity success and has contributed to the United States meagre wage performance and to western Europe's employment problems. The inflexibility of labour markets in western Europe is a focal point of concern in addressing long-term unemployment in western Europe,29 while flexibility in labour markets is often hailed as central to the ability of the United States to avoid the high long-term unemployment in western Europe. However, the problem is not one of general inflexibility or flexibility. Indeed, Japan's labour markets are more inflexible than those of western European countries in some respects. The following sections describe some key differences in labour market organization among Japan, the United States and western Europe that affect relative productivity, growth and stability.

Labour markets in Japan

The organization of labour markets in Japan, both within and between firms, has enhanced Japanese productivity and added to growth. A critical reason for this success has been that Japan's labour markets seem to be able to better align workers' interests with employers' interests than in the United States or western Europe. Three distinct factors provide the foundations for this system.

First, lifetime employment, which is supported by regulations and court cases, makes it difficult to fire workers. Japan is more inflexible than western Europe in this respect. However, as discusssed below, Japan is more flexible in adjusting total wage bills. Lifetime employment is enforced by the ability of the Government to require firms that involuntarily terminate employees to pay stiff financial compensation packages to laid-off employees, as happened to Japan Airlines.3a The system does not cover all firms. It applies primarily to large firms and, by one estimate, directly covers only 25 per cent of the total labour force, including Japan's relatively small public sector.r However, lifetime employment seems to be granted to a broad percentage of the workforce. In the non-agricultural sector, more than 40 per cent of male workers between the ages of 50 and 54 have had more than 30 years of service with the same firm, suggesting the existence of a substantial de facto lifetime employment system that includes companies of all sizes.

When firing restrictions were established in Japan, starting after the Second World War, hiring practices were also put in place that limit the mobility of workers between firms. For example, firms are discouraged from advertising jobs and from hiring employees that will have to change their residence.

A second aspect of Japan's labour markets that makes them inflexible in comparison with western models is the seniority pay system, which rewards tenure rather than merit. The pay system begins with top managers, who are salaried and are not granted stock options. The after-tax salary of the average chief executive officer (CEO) in Japan is approximately 10 times the earnings of the lowest paid employee, as compared with the United States where the average gap is 100 times that of the most junior staff member. 32 The seniority pay system limits destructive competition among employees who cannot increase their individual wages through merit raises. More positively, the system bolsters cooperation between management and workers because the compensation discrepencies are relatively minor, and because managers take pay cuts alongside workers in downturns. Seniority pay also reduces employee resistance to moving to different jobs as their pay is not affected by such moves. It also lowers the administrative costs of setting salaries on an individual basis.

Japan's union structure differs from those prevalent in western Europe and the United States. In Japan, company unions (rather than industry-wide unions) further bolster cooperation of labour with management. With the job security of lifetime employment, Japan's company unions rarely strike, and demands for better wages and working conditions are tied to the performance of the firm.33

Japan's current labour market system only came into existence around the late 1950s. when Japan explicitly rejected the "western" model of labour markets?, Prior to this evolution, Japan experienced bitter strikes and high absenteeism. In the 1920s, Japan endured strikes in steel, shipbuilding and mining, and labour turnover in some industries climbed as high as 100 per cent. Similarly, in the early years following the Second World War, Japan again faced major strikes and confrontations.

These three components of Japan's labour market system mutually reinforce one another to promote cooperation. They also undergird important elements of flexibility that are not enjoyed in western Europe or the United States and that have contributed to Japan's comparative economic success.

With the lifetime employment system, Japanese firms adjust salaries and hours to absorb fluctuations in demand, without having to hire and fire as much as in other OECD countries, and without labour strife. Salary adjustments can be easily accomplished through overtime and the payment system. The latter includes twice yearly bonuses, tied to corporate performance, which comprise an important part of compensation for the majority of employees. In downturns, corporations can reduce annual pay levels by as much as 40 per cent without losing employees and consequently have more flexibility to reduce prices in order to maintain output. Employees also share in the upside gains during periods of growth. Within this labour market system, many Japanese industrial firms have adopted flexible specialization in the workplace as an alternative to mass production. Based on teamwork and participatory management, workers in Japanese corporations typically function as part of a clearly identified team, in which assignments and salary bonuses are given to the group. The adoption of this type of workplace management has increased productivity and improved the ability to transfer individual workers to different product lines as dictated by changes in demand.

The lifetime employment system also allows Japanese workers and firms to be flexible in their adoption of new technologies. The restrictions on inter-firm hiring provides large firms in Japan with a substantial incentive to offer retraining because firms can retain much of the benefits that flow from such activities. As a result, Japanese firms engalge in substantial amounts of onthe-job training. Efforts to retrain workers and generate skills consistent with new technologies usually accompany technical and organizational changes. There is also less fear of displacement by labour-saving technology on the part of workers because of the job security they enjoy. This has facilitated the introduction of robots into manufacturing processes, such that Japan has three times as many robots in operation as the United States, with a workforce that is only half the size.

Alongside industrial and workplace relations, social insurance systems in Japan include a strong national health-care system, unemployment and welfare benefits and statutory minimum wages. However, minimum wages and unemployment benefits are low, and the duration of benefit payments is short in comparison with western European countries. Instead, firms are required to retain a percentage of earnings in unemployment savings pools, thus ensuring that unemployment problems are, to some degree, addressed at the tnicroeco-nomic level. Japan also provides government support to industries that are in decline to keep more of the workforce employed rather than collecting unemployment benefits.

Thus, the organization of labour markets in Japan has fostered productivity advances. As productivity progressed from investments and from successful labour market practices, markets grew and real wages increased. Japan's relatively high real wage rate growth contributed to domestic demand growth.

Whether the Japanese system will be as successful in the future as it has been during the past 30 years in preserving lifetime employment is not clear. In some industries, Japanese firms are beginning to face the prospect of layoffs. For example, in May 1995, a number of Japanese automakers announced that they may have to close factories and idle production workers, a step which, for example, Toyota has not taken since 1951.s

Labour markets in the United States

As noted above, one of the most striking features of the United States labour performance has been its high wage dispersion. Unlike other countries, the growing wage gap in the United States has been closely associated with education levels. For example. between 1973 and 1993, real hourly wages fell by 22.5 per cent for high school dropouts in the United States. In comparison, real wages for employees with six years or more of college declined by only 4.7 per cent.* The dramatic correlations between wage trends and educational achievement have sparked considerable debate in the United States over the consequences of technological change for labour. The fact that, in Japan, the dispersion of wages by educational levels did not increase with technological change suggests that such change per se cannot explain the increased wage dispersion in the United States.v

Evidence suggests that emerging employment practices impart a more significant impact on wage levels in the United States than do skill differentials alone.* In contrast to Japan, United States firms in large part sought increased competitiveness through increased downward flexibility in wages, job security and taxes that help finance social insurance expenditures. The institutions and regulations that govern labour markets in the United States in many ways encourage such strategies rather than provide support for the adoption of new systems of employment.

Downward trends in unionization were stronger in the United States than in Japan or western Europe (see figure XIV.4) as employment in manufacturing industries that were well-unionized declined and non-union service sectors grew. The weakening of unions was not simply an outcome of shifts in the mix of industries, but extended to industries such as airlines as the enforcement of current labour laws became weaker.* By 1990, only 18 per cent of the United States workforce was covered by a collective bargaining agreement, the lowest coverage rate of 17 OECD countries.*

As United States firms downsized and restructured to reduce employment costs, they increased part-time work and reduced job security even in growth periods.* United States policy encourages part-time work because it does not require companies to pro-rate pension, vacation and other benefits for parttime workers, or to provide portable benefits for temporary workers. The United States is also the only industrialized country in which employers may hire and fire "at will". In addition, because the United States, unlike other developed economies, lacks a national health-care system, United States firms often cut labour costs by reducing health benefits.

Although the United States pioneered mass production at the beginning of the century, United States companies have been slow to adopt today's flexible specialization methods and terms of employment that promote cooperation between workers and management, in part because the institutional environment that encourages a low-wage, high job-insecurity strategy discourages changes based on cooperation between workers and management.* Job insecurity is itself a strong deterrent to employee participation, insofar as it undermines cooperation. Organized participation is also discouraged by existing United States labour law, which outlaws company unions and provides no mechanism for creating alternatives within firms, such as the employee councils found in European countries.* Good information on how to implement comprehensive change is often scarce, and managers are frequently reluctant to relinquish decision-making power.

However, within an institutional environment that discourages change, a growing minority of firms are experimenting with efforts to create high performance, team-based work systems. For example, total quality management (TQM) programmes are now widespread. Yet, by some estimates, 70 per cent of these reform efforts fail, in part because the reforms threaten employment under traditional terms of employment.*

Firms that have implemented versions of flexible specialization have often achieved significant productivity gains and saved jobs in situations where they faced the prospect of shutting down (see auto industry example below). Individual firms are experimenting with other forms of employee participation and compensation systems that make labour costs more variable with business upturns and downturns and improve job security. Profit-sharing plans and employee stock ownership plans (ESOPs) have grown, but are not widespread, by one estimate, accounting respectively for 16 per cent and 3 per cent of full-time employees in medium-sized and large firms.* A number of large companies faced with restructuring to survive have created new labourmanagement relations that exchange financial returns and governance participation (such as employee stock ownership in the company and representation on the corporate board of directors) for wage and work-rule concessions. These changes have required new roles for unions. Steel, airline and paper companies provide notable examples.

The low-cost strategy extends beyond wages and employment security to training issues, discouraging on-the-job training because firms cannot retain the benefits of these investments as easily as in Japan. Nor has the United States established vocational training programmes at the societal level, as in many western European countries. These shortcomings mattered less when long-term employment was an expected and normal part of the conditions of employment as established in the post-war period and lasting through the 1960s. Training problems, combined with the problems of high drop-out rates and poor educational achievement, lower United States productivity growth.

An institutional vacuum regarding training at the national level has prompted many state and local efforts to improve schooling and vocational training. For example, the city of Austin, Texas, initiated a local private-public partnership to improve the school-to-work transition, based on the German apprenticeship system.* The education problem has even provoked companies to launch individual efforts at private-public partnerships in order to improve productivity and quality and, hence, profitability. For example, in 1985, the new CEO of the Will-Burt Company, an Ohio metal fabricator, found that "many employees couldn't read the scales or blueprints they were using; some were illiterate. Customers were rejecting 35 per cent of the products the company was turning out; redoing them cost $800,000 a year. Along with a local university, the company developed a training program. Classes were mandatory, on company time. The state of Ohio paid for the teachers and the books; Will-Burt provided the facility. Local highschool and college teachers taught employees blueprint reading, statistical analysis, business principles and basic math. The time spent reworking defective parts fell to about 300 hours a month from 2,000 hours before. The company's profitability improved."47

Overall, the approach to labour markets in the United States helped increase cost competitiveness and profitability, but at the expense of greater productivity gains. The slow-down in wage growth dampened domestic consumption and growth. The flexibility of labour markets in the United States is often viewed as a key reason for the stronger record of employment that the United States maintained as compared to Europe. However, United States labour markets currently discourage the creation of the types of flexible employment and work systems that can increase productivity and job security simultaneously.

Western European labour markets

Many recent studies link western Europe's high structural unemployment to rigidities built into labour market institutions, from wage-setting practices to high expenditures on unemployment insurance and other social insurance mechanisms. Three general arguments are cited regarding the problems in western European labour markets and their effect on employment and growth. First, high wages and inflexible work rules produced by collective bargaining, and high statutory minimum wages, discourage firms from investing, growing and hiring more workers. Secondly, high social wages, such as unemployment benefits, act as a disincentive for unemployed workers to enter the workforce. Thirdly, the social costs of high social wages are a drain on the economy and a burden on firms, particularly when growth is slow and unemployment is high.

Macroeconomic data suggest that the organization of labour markets in western Europe does not limit employment flexibility to the extent commonly believed.* Western European employment rates rose and fell with economic growth rates during the 1980s and 1990s, and exhibited relative inelasticity with respect to changes in real wage rates.* Data for the 1980s on gross job creation and gross job destruction indicate that during this growth period job creation was extensive. France and Italy, as well as a number of Nordic countries, maintained gross job creation rates equal to that of the United States.% The data also suggest that managers in western Europe have more flexibility to lay off workers than is commonly assumed,% as gross job destruction rates, through closures of plants and contractions, were greater than in the United States.% One study suggests that, while western European firms reduce workhours as the first response to a decline in output, rather than use short-term layoffs as in the United States, western European companies will not hold workers for long.%

Although labour-market factors cannot fully explain high unemployment in western Europe, they have played a role in the region's slow growth. High social wages probably hindered the growth of employment in low-wage industries such as retailing. For example, unemployed workers from industries with high wages, such as the auto industry, may be more reluctant to seek employment in industries such as retail because their unemployment benefits nearly equal the wages they would receive in a lower-wage industry. Moreover, if they do take a job in a lower-wage industry and then get laid off again, their subsequent unemployment benefits would be based on the lower-wage rate, rather than on the higher wage that they had received working in the auto industry'.

Thus, the duration and amount of unemployment benefits has probably affected the level of unemployment. However, at current levels, statutory minimum wages in western Europe are not a strong impediment to the growth of employment, although they are higher on average than in Japan or the United States.%

In contrast to the United States, western Europe has maintained higher corporate and payroll taxes that primarily finance welfare state provisions such as unemployment insurance. One study finds that payroll taxes have had a strong and statistically significant impact on employment.%

Labour training and education vary widely among western European countries, but do not appear to be a great barrier to growth in key countries.% For example, Germany's training system is looked upon as a model internationally. The availability of skilled workers from the apprenticeship programme has not prevented an employment problem; almost half (43 per cent) of the unemployed in western Germany have been through such a programme (compared to 57 per cent of all employees).%

Labour market organization probably directly contributed to productivity increases more in western Europe than in the United States, but less than in Japan. Unlike the United States, western European unions and labour-management organizations have supported strong training programmes and provided for employee participation in corporate decision-making.

The existence of strong labour unions and regulatory rigidities in western European labour markets have not prevented European firms from experimenting with new methods for organizing production.% For example, in Sweden, attempts at work reorganization during the 1980s resulted in an emphasis on teamwork, on a more flexible and decentralized organization of production and on total quality control techniques. However, although design quality and job satisfaction improved, productivity, overall, did not. A notable exception was Volvo's Uddevalla plant, which became highly productive by international standards. In Germany, some high-volume producers have pursued a quality-conscious, high value-added strategy to compete, in which workers are paid based on value added. They have been able to introduce a high degree of flexibility on the shop floor within a context of extensive legal regulations and strong unions. Since wages are paid out of value added, they were able to remain competitive in a high-wage economy. Italy has developed its own version of flexible specialization.

Thus, some European countries have in place labour relations and social training institutions that ease the adoption of new technologies and new production methods to a greater degree than in the United States. For example, since the 1950s, German laws have required a workers' council in every substantial workplace and representation for workers on corporate boardsm Today. German companies use inter-industry works councils and other joint labour-management institutions to facilitate adjustments to new technology and changing markets. However, there is less cyclical flexibility in labour markets in western European countries than in Japan, and the adoption of flexible methods for the organization of work that increase productivity are not as widespread as in Japan.

Product market effects on growth and innovation

The regulation of product markets and relations among economic agents within markets have been important, although too often ignored, factors in slowing growth in new sectors in western Europe as compared with Japan and the United States. Most telling, some internationally fast-growing service sectors make up the majority of the difference in employment growth between western Europe and the United States. Thus, while both western Europe and the United States restructured their manufacturing sectors, the employment declines in western Europe were not offset by increases in new services industries.

Western European markets face greater fragmentation than those in Japan or the United States, which is a principal obstacle to growth in industries such as telecommunications. The absence of telecommunications operators for western Europe as a whole and the current limits to basic services covering western Europe (electronic mail and file transfer, remote access to databases and interactive image transmission service) have slowed growth in this industry and prompted policy initiatives to create a strong western European telecommunications systemm

In addition, growth in some of these activities has been held back by less new product and process development and greater product market restrictions. Innovations that made major differences between United States growth and western European growth were securitization and derivatives in banking; specialty retailing formats in general merchandise retailing; and new films, cable television channels and video rental formats in the film/TV/video industry. These differences were in part due to product prohibitions and lack of transparency in banking; zoning laws and controls on the forms of competition in retailing; and a series of constraints in various segments of film/TV/video.

United States product market regulations have had positive and negative effects on employment and wages, depending on the industry. Some industries that deregulated domestically in the 1980s, such as banking, have been able to increase employment primarily through the introduction of new products even as traditional employment was cut back through the introduction of new processes.

United States markets are more open in general than those of other developed countries, with a relative lack of restrictions on international trade and foreign investment. The openness of the United States economy has been blamed for stagnating wage rates and declines in blue-collar jobs because increased lowwage imports have shifted jobs to low-wage countries. However, imports still account for a relatively small share of domestic consumption in the United States (and western Europe and Japan), and thus should not be highlighted as a central cause of unemployment increases or wage-rate declines.62

Product market regulations have not barred Japanese productivity and growth overall. However, in a few industries (e.g., retailing, food and construction), traditional industrial organization has been relatively protected. Japan's distribution system is also complex, and relatively unproductive, with products moving through many intermediaries before being sold. Because of such complexities, these Japanese industries have not yet had productivity growth, investments and work reorganization equal to those in the rest of the economy. In some Japanese industries, such as banking and telecommunications, regulations that inhibit new products may have affected employment in both positive and negative ways, in some areas by maintaining low productivity, in others by inhibiting growth.

Japan's relatively small percentage of imports and foreign direct investment in manufacturing industries as compared with other developed countries has increased pressure on Japan to further open the Japanese market to foreign companies and products.

LABOURANDTECHNOLOGY: TRANSFORMATIONOFTWOINDUSTRIES

Rapid technological and organizational change is transforming many industries in the world today. This section focuses on automobiles and data processing to illustrate changes taking place in manufacturing and services, respectively.

The automotive industry accounted directly for 1 to 3 per cent of GDP in the G7 countries in 1989, and employed a significant percentage of the workers in manufacturing, accounting for 5.2 per cent of employment in the United States, 11.2 per cent in western Germany, 9.6 per cent in France and 6.9 per cent in Japan.0 The industry also merits attention because firms operating within it, especially the market leaders, are moving away from mass production towards flexible specialization.

Services have grown to become a more significant part of industrialized economies. With this growth, the importance of technological change in the service sector and its impact on labour have become central economic issues. The data-processing industry has changed rapidly in the past two decades owing to technological advances in telecommunications and computers.

In both the automobile and the data-processing industries, transformations taking place today have profound implications for the location of production and for the participation of low-wage countries in world trade in goods and services.

Henry Ford began production of the Model T in 1908, pioneering a system of production that came to be known as "mass production" or "Fordism".64 The key to mass production is a standardized product assembled from interchangeable parts by interchangeable workers. The system permits minute subdivision of, and removes virtually all skill requirements from, the assembly process. This organizational change produced tremendous productivity gains. The key process technology of the day the moving assembly line, which refined mass production so that parts moved instead of workers was introduced in 1913, five years after the beginning of mass production.

Workers in Ford's factory resented the de-skilling of tasks and pressure for speed: labour turnover soared, reaching an annual rate of 380 per cent by 1913. A 13 per cent increase in the minimum daily wage (to $2.34) failed to reduce turnover, so in January 1914, Ford offered his employees the unprecedented wage of five dollars a day. Because of the economies of mass production, Ford was able to pay high wages and reduce prices at the same time. In a period when most prices were rising, the retail price of a Model T touring car fell continuously from $950 in 1909 to $360 in 1916.

In relentless pursuit of reduced costs, Ford carried standardization to an extreme. Beginning in 1914, he offered the Model T in only one colour (black). A limited number of body styles shared the same chassis and mechanical parts. a For the consumer, an advantage of standardization was that replacement parts could easily be obtained. Moreover, unlike craft production, parts would actually fit the vehicle.

Mass production drastically cut the cost of automobile assembly by increasing labour and capital productivity. Craft assembly requires more labour and more capital than is the case in mass production, for each product is unique and components arc not standardized. Hundreds of skilled craftsmen across western Europe and North America found it impossible to compete with Ford in the production of automobiles. Only a few producers of luxury cars were able to survive by selling at high prices in small, niche markets. The techniques of mass production spread quickly in North America and slowly in western Europe, but by the 1950s, a number of western European mass producers, including Volkswagen. Fiat, Renault and Daimler-Benz, were competing successfully with three large North American mass producers (General Motors, Ford and Chrysler).

While post-war western Europe was completing the transition to mass production of automobiles, Toyota was pioneering a new system of production in Japan. This system was Toyota's response to the needs of the small Japanese market for a wide variety of trucks and passenger cars. The Japanese Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI), at the time, recommended mass production of a few standardized models. Toyota opted instead for production in small lots, using a just-in-time (JIT) supply of components.

The system that Toyota developed came to be known as flexible specialization or "lean production". In addition to small lots and JIT, it includes production to order rather than for stock, minimal in-process inventories, multi-skilled workers organized in teams, treatment of employees and suppliers as a fixed rather than variable cost, selective use of automation and continuous improvement. Like the previous transition from craft to mass production, Toyota developed the organizational system of flexible specialization long before the complementary process technology robotics was invented and used to increase productivity further.

Flexible specialization increases the productivity of both labour and capital, over mass production. Workers are expected to do the job of any member of their team rather than carry out a single, mind-numbing assembly operation.

JIT production of components not only saves on storage of inventory, it also minimizes the cost of mistakes that might otherwise be hidden for weeks or for months. Linder mass production, companies typically make and store enough components to last a month or more, then push them through the assembly line regardless of quality. Defects are corrected at the end of the line in large rework areas. Under flexible specialization, defects are corrected immediately .Ind steps are taken to ensure that they do not happen again. Any worker can, top the production line at any time that a problem is spotted.

Flexible specialization also carries important implications for the location of employment. To save transportation costs, mass producers typically assemble vehicles close to markets even if the models assembled are identical. 16 But each component is manufactured at a central location, so parts can be sourced from low-cost producers anywhere in the world (see box XIV.2). Thus, components are sourced globally and standardized vehicles are assembled in local markets.

HENRY FORD'S MODEL T WAS A " CAR", designed for sale in all markets. Components were produced in Detroit, then shipped for assembly to save transportation costs and import duties. The final product was identical everywhere. Western European tastes and driving conditions differed from those of North Americans, however, so Ford soon found it necessary to design a smaller Model Y for production and sale in that market. Eventually, Ford designed distinct models for each western European country in which the firm had production facilities. Vehicles assembled in Germany or Belgium shared no parts with those assembled in the United Kingdom.

Years later, in the 1970s, the Ford Motor Company took advantage of the removal of barriers to intra-western European trade to assemble a single model the Fiesta at plants in the United Kingdom, Spain and Belgium. Ford was able to benefit from economies of scale by shipping many of the standardized components from a single factory. All carburetors, for example, were produced in Ireland, all transmissions in France, all sparkplugs arid radiators in the United Kingdom.. Building on this western European experience, Ford attempted to revive the world car concept with the 1981 Escort. In the end, the attempt was unsuccessful, for the only thing the western European and American versions of the Escort had in common was a name and two insignificant parts.

In 1993, Ford launched another world car (the Mondeo), this time with more success. It was necessary to lengthen the body of the North American version, named the Ford Contour or Mercury Mystique, but the cars do share a common chassis and all mechanical parts. More world cars are planned, including a 1999 Escort. The aim is to assemble virtually the same car in different markets. Common parts will be purchased from the lowestcost global suppliers, then shipped for assembly in each of the main markets. In addition, savings on development costs are envisaged if more vehicles of a common design are produced. It remains to be seen whether this return to the mass production model of Henry Ford's Model T will prove successful against the totally different global strategy of Japanese automakers.b


With flexible specialization, like mass production, assembly plants are located close to main markets. But, compared to mass production, more components are purchased from outside suppliers in nearby plants (a maximum of two hours' transport). Assembly lines at Toyota City in Japan are replenished constantly from nearby component plants. Toyota's competitors in Japan have set up similar supply systems as part of a transition to flexible production. Without this geographical proximity, there can be no JIT production. In geographical space, flexible specialization thus implies a high concentration of automobile production, including components, compared to mass pmduction.67

Flexible specialization does not reduce the importance of scale in the assembly of motor vehicles.

"What the new lean production techniques allow is the production of a variety of cars but within a large annual volume. Hence, an assembly plant is still optimum at around 250,000 units a year, although the modelspecific optimum can be lower .... What the new techniques do is make it easier for large companies to make a variety of products, but they do not make it easier for small companies to survive. "es

This fact, combined with JIT production of components, has profound implications for international trade and for the location of production.

The logic of flexible specialization dictates that Japanese automakers would eventually have shifted production to their main export markets. Because of protectionism, this shift took place sooner. The Japanese competed first by exporting to the major markets in North America and western Europe; then, in the face of rising import barriers in the 1980s, they established assembly plants in those markets. This is reminiscent of the behaviour of Henry Ford earlier in the century.


This is not the case in western Europe, where Japanese automakers rely on existing suppliers in order rapidly to reach targeted levels of western European content. JIT production of components is absent in Japanese transplants in the United Kingdom. The pressure to work with existing suppliers means that Japanese transplants have JIT delivery, not JIT production, with a consequent increase in costs. Honda, for example, had to build storage facilities for a day's supply of incoming parts that feed, JIT, into its assembly lines.76 Nissan stores two days' supply of parts in external warehouses. In addition, large suppliers such as Bosch, the German manufacturer of braking and electrical systems, have set up warehouses near the Japanese assembly plants. The assembly plants themselves may be very efficient, yet the inventory costs of Japanese transplant production in western Europe are high because components are not produced on a JIT basis. There is considerable doubt that western European auto assembly plants, in an open and competitive market, will continue to ignore the potential cost savings from JIT production of components.

Japanese companies, through flexible specialization, are able to meet the demands of international markets by producing, in each major market, models popular in that market. Some vehicles are then exported to other markets as a niche product. Honda, for example, engineers and produces the Accord coupe and station-wagon exclusively in Marysville, Ohio, then ships some to Japan where they are marketed as a luxury American import.n In this sense, the Honda Accord is often referred to as a "world car", but it is very different from Ford's concept of a world car. (see box XIV.2 above). Similarly, Nissan produces models in the United Kingdom designed for western Europe and exports a small number of these each year to Japan.

Toyota, along with other Japanese companies that followed its lead in flexible specialization, poses a serious threat to mass producers, just as Henry Ford threatened craft producers decades ago. In 1950, Japan produced a mere 0.3 per cent of the total world auto output. By 1960, Japan claimed 17.8 per cent of the world market and 20 years later Japan overtook the United States as the leading producer of passenger cars in the world, with 25.5 per cent of total world output.n Today, Toyota in Japan remains the industry leader, setting standards towards which other producers can so far only aspire. Competition with the output of Toyota City is affecting the productivity and product quality of plants everywhere, but particularly in Japan, where import barriers cannot shield weaker producers from Toyota, and in North America, which has been less protectionist than western Europe.

Western Europe's poor performance reflects continued reliance on mass-production techniques combined, in some cases, with elements of craft production.n

During the late 1980s and early 1990s, there has been convergence in average levels of labour productivity and, especially, quality. On average, however, western European plants continue to lag behind those of North America, and North American plants behind those of Japan (see figures XIV.5 and XIV.6). The lag of western Europe and North America behind best practice is even greater, as Toyota continues to report levels of productivity and quality that are well above industry averages for Japan. Because of this low productivity and quality, combined with high transportation costs, it is unlikely that Japanese imports from western Europe and North America will increase significantly if distribution barriers to imports are reduced.

 North American automakers first responded to the Japanese threat by automating their mass production plants, investing in robots, programmable logic controllers (PLCs) and automated guided vehicles (AGVs). General Motors was financially the strongest North American company, and thus invested the most: $42 billion between 1980 and 1987 on modernization of old factories and construction of new ones. The results of these efforts were far from satisfactory for workers or for management. In 1988, GM found that one of its most automated plants had lower productivity and produced vehicles with poorer quality than NUMMI, the labour-intensive plant it operates in Fremont. California in a joint venture with Toyota.n More than GM, researchers from the International Motor Vehicle Program at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology found that Ford responded to competition by emphasizing organizational change; in moving towards flexible specialization, the company has reached levels of quality and productivity that rival those of Japanese transplants in North America.n

An assembly plant in Linden, New Jersey, was one of the plants that GM automated in the mid-1980s. GM increased the number of robots from 1 to 219, and invested in other computerized equipment. A careful study of this introduction of new technology concludes that the plant's organizational structure, designed for mass production, remained intact: the workforce remained polarized between skilled labour and production workers. There was a marked increase in both the number of skilled workers and their skill requirements. In contrast, the number of production workers and their skill requirements decreased. Production workers who kept their jobs were subordinated to ever more sophisticated machines, machines that were managed and maintained by increasing numbers of skilled technicians.'

The MIT survey of assembly plants found only a weak association between automation and productivity, consistent with the experience of General Motors in the 1980s. The MIT team concluded that robots and other hightechnology equipment introduced into a plant without organizational change can "end up adding about as many indirect technical and service workers as they remove unskilled direct workers from manual assembly tasks".n Flexible specialization concentrates on organization organization of workers and organization of suppliers and is typically less automated than mass production. Michael A. Cusanumo, a well-known student of the Japanese automobile industry, explains the strategy in these words:

"One of the brilliant contributions of Toyota managers ... was to view automation with scepticism. Automation, unless it was flexible (easily changed or reprogrammed to handle different product models or variations, or volume fluctuations), introduced rigidity into production processes and was not suitable for labour-intensive assembly operations."n By introducing automation only when appropriate, it is possible to retain high productivity of capital while increasing the productivity of labour and retaining flexibility in the production process.

Government trade and investment policies have influenced the pace of change and the location of jobs significantly. In practice, policies are inevitably mixed, but western Europe, more than North America, has relied on protection. Members of the European Union have restricted Japanese imports overall to no more than 10 or 11 per cent of total sales of automobiles in the EU. And, while the United Kingdom has welcomed Japanese investment, most western European countries have not. Nissan, the first Japanese automaker to establish an assembly plant in the United Kingdom, began production in 1986 20 per cent local content. Six years later, Nissan had more than 80 per cent local content and 195 western European suppliers. Two recently established Japanese transplants in the United Kingdom Honda and Toyota have made an even greater effort to add high local content. Toyota inaugurated its plant in December 1992 with a western European content of 60 per cent, and a commitment to reach 80 per cent within two years.n

Total market share of Japanese companies in western Europe is projected to be 16 per cent in 1999, the year before liberalization of western Europe's auto market. It is not yet clear whether North American exports of vehicles produced by Japanese transplants are to be counted as part of the agreed quota on Japanese exports!)

In contrast to the experience in western Europe, the Japanese were allowed to capture 22 per cent of the domestic market in North America before protective quotas (in the form of voluntary export restraints) were negotiated in 1981. North America imposes no local-content rules on assembly plants, so the Japanese were able to jump trade barriers easily by establishing "screwdriver" operations, adding local content gradually over time.

Restrictions on international trade and foreign direct investment flows preserve jobs in the short run, but they also impede the transition from mass production to flexible specialization, jeopardizing competitiveness and employment in the long run.

Overall, flexible specialization results in increased productivity, which implies reduced employment in the automotive industry. None the less, employment losses in the industrialized countries would have been even greater with continued mass production of motor vehicles. As a mature product, the production of automobiles some years ago seemed poised to move, like toasters and microwaves, to low-wage countries: first to Japan, then to the Republic of Korea. Mexico, Malaysia and other newly industrializing countries. By turning to flexible specialization, the industrialized countries will be able to retain their automotive industries. Because of economies of scale, production will tend to concentrate in large consumer markets, including large markets in developing countries such as Brazil and Mexico. However, with flexible specialization, it will be increasingly difficult for low-wage countries with small markets to produce automotive components for export or to assemble vehicles for domestic consumption at a reasonable cost.m

Data processing

Data processing is the systematic organization, recording, transmission and use of information. This industry, like transportation, is as old as civilization itself! However, unlike automobiles, in data processing technological change is preceding organizational and skill transformations and, in turn, affecting work organization and the skills needed in the industry.

In every society, clerks and scribes who processed data were held in high esteem, for they possessed skills and education far superior to those of their contemporaries. For thousands of years. the tools of the trade were simple: something to write with and something to write on. The first machine to facilitate data processing the abacus was invented more than five thousand years ago; it came to be widely used throughout Asia, Africa and western Europe by the time of the Middle Ages. This amazing machine was the forerunner of the modern computer, but mechanization did not progress further until the end of the nineteenth century, when mechanical typewriters, cash regkters and adding machines made their appearance.

The mechanical stage of data processing was followed by an electromechanical stage (1920-1960), with the advent of calculators, electric typewriters, bank cheque sorting machines, punched cards and paper tape systems. Then came the computer revolution with the appearance, in rapid succession, of the first generation of digital computers (based on vacuum tubes), second-generation computers (based on transistors), bar codes, magnetic tape for storage (replacing punched cards), third-generation computers (based on microchips), magnetic disk devices (replacing, to an increasing extent, magnetic tape), facsimile transmission machines, video display terminals, optical scanners, microcomputers and optical discs for storage (compact discs with read-only memory. popularly known as CD-ROMs). Progress continues at a rapid pace on miniaturization, increased speed and reduced cost of computers, as well as enhanced efficiency and reduced cost of optical scanners.

Over the past quarter of a century, data processing has focused increasingly on digitization of data to produce computer-readable files. As the use of computers in North America became widespread in the 1980s, demand for data processing accelerated. Companies turned increasingly to outside firms as an alternative to hiring and training large numbers of data-entry operators. To save on labour costs. some firms began to ship raw data in bulk by air freight from the customer's office to an offshore data processor. Documents were then keyed-in, and a magnetic tape of the computer files was returned by air freight to the client. This procedure is still used when telecommunication links are poor or speed is not important. Increasingly, however, raw data are transmitted overseas by cable or satellite using high-speed imaging technology. e The data are then keyed and returned on-line over the same telecommunications line. shrinking the turn-around time to a matter of hours, regardless of geographic distance between data processor and client.

In a few short decades, technological change has transformed the data-processing industry. Modern telecommunications and computers allow the "back rooms" of offices to move to geographically remote locations, including overseas locations, in pursuit of low labour costs.

There are few barriers to trade in computer services, so low-wage countries can, in principle, export a variety of services, including data processing, computer aided design/computer aided manufacturing (CAD/CAM), geographical information systems (CIS) and programming (development of software). In practice, exports of computer services from low-wage countries have been limited for the most part to data entry and processing. There has also been some export of programming services from countries such as India and Hungary. Emphasis is on low end, labour-intensive services, where reduced wage costs are valued more than face-to-face interaction with clients.

Even in data processing, globalization has not proceeded very far, despite the obvious attraction of countries with literate labour, low wages, excellent communications and the English language. Although cumpames ha c increa.,ingly contracted out their data processing, work tends to be done in the same country even the same metropolitan area as the client company.84 Spatial restructuring of the data-processing industry has proceeded at a slow pace for a number of reasons.

First, with electronic services, as opposed to physical goods, issues of privacy and security are paramount. With modern telecommunications and the miracle of imaging, a client located halfway around the world is as close in cyberspace as one located nearby in physical space, so geographic distance has little effect on turn-around time for a data-processing job. Yet, even though firms are quite willing, even eager, to send components for assembly to an offshore factory, they are often reluctant to send their data for processing to a distant location. A lost shirt or toy is not the same as a lost client "ledger", medical claim, banking or insurance account. Processed data, unlike physical products, are often vital to a company and susceptible to misuse, so the potential cost of control loss can be high.

Secondly, the costs of decentralization may outweigh the benefits of a reduced wage bill. Such costs account for observed inertia of firms in other areas. For example, firms could reduce their need for office space by staggering work-hours or by allowing staff to work at home, yet this is not routinely done. Presumably, the increased cost of coordinating work over time or space outweighs any savings in rent. Similarly, many firms could rent office space at a lower price by moving immediately from high-rent districts, yet they choose to remain in their traditional locations. Again, presumably, there are benefits from each existing location, such as access to a labour pool or contact with other firms, that outweigh any savings from relocation.

Thirdly, management has imperfect knowledge and may not appreciate, or may overestimate the costs of, the logistics involved in offshore data processing. This begs the question, however, of why numerous suppliers of this service have not been able to convince potential clients of their ability to produce a quality product at substantial savings.

Electronic data processing is widely believed to be a growth industry, but few statistics are available to prove or disprove this claim. In the United States, by far the largest market for this service, the census of service industries shows that employment grew from 183,422 in 1982 to 234,356 in 1987 and 265,516 in 1992.e These figures suggest that average annual employment growth in the United States fell from 5.0 per cent in 1982-1987 to 2.5 per cent in 1987-1992. At the same time, however, companies in the United States, as well as those in Canada, England and Japan, came to rely increasingly on offshore data processors in places such as Ireland, Scotland, Sri Lanka, India, China, the Philippines, Mexico and the Caribbean. Eastern Europe. South America and Africa are now receiving consideration as potential sites for data processing.

Reliable statistics on the total number of persons employed in offshore data entry and processing do not exist. Estimates for 1989 and 1990 vary from as little as 8,000 to more than 40,000.0 The figure of 8,000 is undoubtedly too low, for 5,000 are known to have been employed at this time by offshore data processors in the Philippines alone.v Data processing was also important in the Caribbean by the early 1990s, with 2,500 employed in Jamaica, 1,200 in Barbados, and 88 and 150 respectively in the small islands of Saint Lucia and

 These figures refer to establishments specialized in computer processing and data preparation (SIC 7374), thus exclude in-house data processing by Government and other establishments. Demand for data processing is greatest in the United States because of the large number of computers in that country, and because it is compute' power that digitization. 

Offshore data processing did not exist in developing countries before the 1980s, so growth rates for the activity have been impressive. Many Governments have come to expect this rate of growth to continue in the future; they are targeting the industry with fiscal incentives and costly telecommunications infrastructure in a bid to provide modern jobs for their labour force. An added attraction is the fact that businesses are often owned and managed by local entrepreneurs. In both the Philippines and Jamaica, the vast majority of dataentry firms are locally owned; on the other hand, in Barbados and Saint Lucia, all are subsidiaries of foreign companies.%

New demands for computer-accessible databases are generating increasing work for the data-entry industry. A recent example is the transfer of information from telephone directories to compact discs with read-only memory (CDROM). Telephone companies maintain up-to-date computer-accessible files containing information on all subscribers; no further processing is necessary to download these files onto computer discs or make them available on-line. Some companies, such as NYNEX in north-eastern United States, and British Telecom and other companies in western Europe, offer this service, but users in most parts of the world must look up numbers in printed directories or dial directory assistance." Increasingly, however, they are offered the option of purchasing directory information that has been transferred by independent companies from printed telephone directories to CD-ROM (see box XIV.3).

 NEITHER A PRINTED TELEPHONE DIRECTORY nor directory assistance allows a user to exploit the full potential of telephone listings. Suppose, for example, that a person has only an address, or part of an address, and wants to locate the name and phone number that corresponds to it. Or suppose that a direct-marketing company wants the names, addresses and telephone numbers of all residents of a particular building or a particular neighbourhood. With information on-line or on CD-ROM, data can be sorted and retrieved not only by name, but also by any logical variable or combination of variables, such as address, city, state or province, postal code, business heading, industrial classification or telephone number.

Numerous companies have emerged to transfer directory information from telephone books to CD-ROM and market the product to the general public. One of the most successful is Pro CD, a Massachusetts company that employs 450 data-entry operators at Beijing Aviation and Aeronautical University in China. The first time a telephone directory is processed, all the information is entered by two separate operators ("double keyed") and discrepancies are sent to a third operator for correction. Updates are handled by keying first the telephone numbers of the new directories, then the remainder of the information only if there have been changes. Changes in listings are frequent, however; in the case of British Telecom they amount to about 200,000 per week.

For the United States, Pro CD offers five CD-ROM discs containing over 72 million residential listings and 11 million business listings copied from the white and yellow pages of approximately 5,000 telephone directories. The full package is updated quarterly and sells for as little as US$149, with one free update, although the list price is US$299. Pro CD offers similar packages for Australia and Canada and is working on one for the United Kingdom with a view to undercutting the price that British Telecom charges for its CD-ROM.


As computers become ever more widely disseminated, the amount of data that is collected and used can be expected to continue to increase. None the less, as more and more data are digitized from the beginning at the point of transaction, opportunities for offshore data entry in low-wage countries can be expected to fall. Telephone companies, for example, maintain a continuously updated list of subscribers. They can sell this database to clients without further data entry, at much lower cost than independent companies that purchase telephone books and enter all the listings by hand. It is only a matter of time before such services are offered at a price just low enough to discourage entry by independent companies that face high fixed costs of new data entry.

Other databases are also increasingly maintained wholly or largely by point of transaction data entry. Retailers, for example, enter credit card data into a computer at the point of sale, eliminating the need to key in data from paper receipts. In banks, customers punch in data themselves at automatic teller machines. Similarly, hospitals submit insurance claims on computer diskettes, courts record legal cases with a word processor, and libraries label new books with bar codes and enter them into an electronic "card catalogue".* Recently, passengers on some airlines have begun to board planes with reservation numbers or plastic "smart cards" instead of tickets, reducing drastically the need for manual data entry.

Another factor working to decrease demand for manual data entry is the decreasing price and increasing reliability of optical character recognition (OCR) devices. These devices are not yet able to read tiny fonts, printed on porous telephone directory paper, without a high rate of error, nor can they read cursive handwriting, but it is predicted that both will be possible before order to take context into account and improve on character "decisions".

Even today, OCR scanners utilize rules and spell-checkers to correct automatically many errors of recognition. A scanner may, for example. read a string of characters as "botel", but correct the word to "hotel" following an automatic spell-check. Or an address may appear ambiguously to be either 1144 Broad St. or 1144 Broadway. A check for consistency between the street name and the building number, telephone number or postal code can yield an unambiguous, correct choice, eliminating the need for costly human-machine interaction. This process is referred to as intelligent character recognition.


In the first year of operation, Avon's intelligent OCR software performed at a 98 per cent accuracy rate with a 0 per cent substitution rate. In other words, only 2 per cent of the handprinted alphanumeric characters had to be sent to operators for editing and the final product was almost error-free. The shift to intelligent OCR diminished shipping errors and drastically reduced the need for human operators. In addition, the function of the operator shifted from data entry to data editing. The productivity of OCR operators vastly exceeds that of manual data-entry operators, but there is no evidence that greater skills are demanded by the -new technology. An Avon executive reports, in fact, that intelligent OCR reduced training from weeks to days because it's very easy to learn".97

Simple OCR systems can now achieve accuracy rates of above 99 per cent for clean images of text printed in a wide range of fonts. Handwriting, small or decorative typefaces, dirty images and misaligned pages confuse OCR scanners. Intelligent OCR reduces this confusion, and is expected within the next five years to attain close to 100 per cent accuracy for virtually any text. When this happens. OCR will completely displace manual data entry.

Technological change created electronic data processing and gave great hope to countries seeking new products for export to world markets. Technological change is now destroying the very jobs so recently created. In the very near future, most data entry will be done at the point of transaction. Less and less data will be entered first on printed forms that require further processing; printed forms that do exist will be processed with intelligent OCR scanners. With these new technologies, there will be little outsourcing of data processing at all, and most certainly little or no outsourcing to overseas establishments. The "back room" of offices will return to headquarters. which will employ a small, but highly productive, data-processing team. High productivity in data processing will be a product not of high skills, but rather of intelligent OCR scanners. The employees who operate this equipment will receive no more training than -old-fashioned" data keypunch operators, and possibly much less.

As it destroys jobs, technological change simultaneously generates new employment opportunities. This comes about in three distinct ways. First, industry output is not fixed; rather, it increases as a consequence of decreased costs. Modern computers and scanners use less labour per unit of output than was the norm with electrical typewriters and calculators, and still less than "best practice" of the quill pen and abacus era; but far more data are processed today than would have been feasible without technological change. Increased output diminishes, to an important extent, the negative impact of increased productivity on jobs.

Secondly, the new technology requires new machines (computers, scanners, telecommunications) and software to run them. All this generates employment in industries that supply inputs to data processing. Thirdly, drastically reduced data-processing costs translates into reduced production costs in industries throughout the economy, stimulating output and employment. Ample and timely information on inventories and retail sales permits factories to reduce their stock of intermediate and raw materials, goods in process and final goods, with consequent cost savings. In financial services, the technological revolution in data processing has had an even greater impact. One researchers estimates that:

"Since 1964, the real cost of recording, transmitting and processing information (including financial information) has fallen more than 95 per cent. This tremendous cost reduction makes it cheaper to record and process trades, cheaper to manage portfolios and cheaper to match the users with the suppliers of capital."

As a result, the supply of banking and other financial services has mushroomed in the past three decades in industrialized and developing countries alike.

Even though new jobs are created to replace those destroyed, technological change is seldom painless. New jobs may be located in a totally different region, or require vastly different skills, compared to jobs that become obsolete. As developing countries undergo the process of liberalization of trade and investment barriers, new comparative advantages will arise in information technologies; new employment opportunities in industries such as data processing may, in the future, be generated as much as a result of the development of internal financial and product markets as from functioning as an exporter of low-wage services.

CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

Today, the developed countries are undergoing profound transformations in the industrial mix of their economies, as technological development spawns new industries and new products. Rapid innovation is occurring in information technologies, environmental and biotechnologies and new materials. At the same time, innovations are under way in the organization of R&D and in the organization of work and of labour markets.

Technological innovation, and the enhanced productivity that it can bring, is essential to strong long-term growth and rising living standards. The evolution of management within firms and of relevant socio-economic institutions are equally essential. The magnitude of the transformations under way in both technology and organization suggests that the developed economies may be at the beginning of a new era of change.

During the past 15 years, R&D networks between firms and between universities and industry have proliferated, both within developed countries and internationally. Technology development is becoming a process that depends on cooperation and collaboration among businesses, Governments and universities. At the same time, every developed economy has, to varying degrees, adopted new flexible methods for the organization of work, to achieve productivity and quality improvements and market flexibility that exceeds the capacity of traditional mass production.

Technological changes have often transformed the organization of work and resulted in changes in the skills needed in an industry, as in the data-processing industry. But significant organizational changes have frequently stimulated technological innovation, such as in the auto industry where such changes produced tremendous productivity gains and preceded the introduction of key process technology innovations when mass production was introduced at the beginning of the twentieth century, and today with the introduction of flexible specialization.

The differing patterns of investment in new ideas, and in physical and human capital, as well as differences in the organization of labour markets and of product markets, have resulted in important differences in the comparative outcomes for labour in Japan, the United States and western Europe.

Japan's relative success in achieving technological change and maintaining real wage growth, low unemployment and low wage dispersion are in part due to strong investments and to the organization of its labour markets. A central aspect of the organization of labour in Japan is that, based on a commitment to lifetime employment, industrial relations promote cooperation between workers and firms. This allows for the smooth introduction of new technologies and ensures that workers and management share both the economic burdens of cyclical downturns and the gains during economic upswings. The resulting cyclical flexibility in labour costs has helped Japan maintain low unemployment. On the whole, cooperation helps foster long-term productivity increases and maintain employment stability.

Unlike Japan and western Europe, the United States has developed large wage gaps by educational levels during the past decade. The comparison of the United States experience to that of Japan and western Europe suggests that the wage gaps in the United States have not resulted from technological change per se. The wage-gap problems are part of a broader United States response to increased international competition. The United States has emphasized downward pressure on wages and employment, while it de-emphasized investment in physical and human capital. Greater labour market flexibility has increased part-time work and reduced job security even in growth periods. In the process, labour relations that came to fruition in the post-Second World War era are being weakened, but they have not yet been replaced with new, more efficient methods for organizing labour markets in the economy as a whole.

Western Europe's long-term unemployment problems are not just due to labour market inflexibility. They are also a result of inefficiencies in product markets that have slowed innovation and growth in service sectors that are experiencing rapid growth and transformation in the United States, such as telecommunications, banking, film/TV/video, and specialty retailing. As a result, western Europe destroyed manufacturing jobs but did not produce strong growth in services, and thereby increased long-term unemployment.

The comparative analysis of developments in Japan, western Europe and the United States suggests that to realize the potential of new technologies, policies that stimulate investment in both process and product technologies should be pursued to complement sound macroeconomic policy. Greater investment is essential to upgrade the stock of physical capital, to foster basic and applied R&D and to improve education and training of the workforce.

Investment policies should be complemented with policies that further advance the organization of R&D at a societal level through stronger and more extensive networks among firms and between industry, universities and Governments.


Too often, investment policies are developed in isolation from education, training and labour market policies. Stronger linkages between these policy fields can improve the overall coherence and efficiency of government actions. In addition to improving training programmes and ensuring that educational institutions provide students with the knowledge and skills needed in today's economy, the organization of labour markets should be geared towards increased cooperation between workers and management.

Product market regulations and restrictions on trade and direct investment flows can strongly influence the pace of innovation, growth and employment. Constraints in product markets can preserve jobs in the short run, but they also can impede the introduction of new technologies and new methods of organization, jeopardizing competitiveness and employment in the long run.

Relative to western Europe and the United States, Japan seems to have in place institutional relations that ease the adaptation to technological change and result in the greatest productivity benefits and long-term stability. However, Japan will face new challenges in maintaining these advantages as its firms become more global in their manufacturing processes, and as it is required to push the technological frontier forward, rather than to catch up.

The present chapter is written in response to rising concerns about social security policy in developed and developing countries, as well as in economies in transition. Those concerns relate both to the volume of resources that a population needs to mobilize in order to provide social security and to the instruments by means of which those resources are mobilized. As the proportion of dependent populations in the total increases, the volume of resources required for their maintenance at any given level of well-being will rise. The current and continuing processes of ageing are of great relevance to these debates, as is the level of benefits. Where Governments pay established levels of benefits irrespective of contributions to those funds, payments on account of social security can be a determining factor in maintaining macroecoIllouir balance in the economy.

At the microeconomic level, benefit payments can he an important determinant of the reserve price of labour and thus affect the volume of unemployment. They can also affect decisions regarding current and future consumption. Finally, saving for old age can be a powerful source of accumulation affecting the development of, and the control over, capital markets.

Social security programmes provide transfer incomes at those times in childhood and old age, and during unemployment, sickness and disablement when individuals cannot earn incomes either at all or in adequate amounts. They are powerful instruments for redistributing earned incomes between generations living at the same time. Those transferred to children and young adults have been seen as constituting investment in human capital and are increasingly viewed as being critical to economic growth. Besides, there are other large returns to society from that expenditure. Payments in the event of unemployment, disability, sickness and old age reduce uncertainty in personal life and were considered a component of the demand management policies that contributed to successful economic policies in the OECD countries during the period 1950-1973. These perceptions have now changed. Incentives to enterprise, to work, to saving and investment and to increasing the mobility of all factors of production have greater prominence in the minds of most policy makers. Those very forces of dynamism themselves increase uncertainty, as is clearly manifested in economies in transition, and ways need to be found to reduce that uncertainty, and the tension between current consumption on the one hand and economic growth and future consumption on the other.

In addition, in economies in transition, previously powerful social security arrangements are undergoing radical change, exposing both individuals and economies to new sources of uncertainty that need to be responded to with fresh institutional arrangements. In all countries, the changing composition of the family is putting new strains on this traditional common source of income security. In several developing countries, large numbers of orphaned children and persons with disabilities, consequent upon either epidemic diseases or war, create new demands for government payments to maintain incomes.

After clarifying the notion of social security in its first section, this chapter goes on to consider the several sources of income security, the question of ageing populations, the design of social security schemes, the spread of social security programmes in developing countries, and the respective functions of government and the market.

WHAT CONSTITUTES SOCIAL SECURITY?

Social security policy is concerned with the economic security provided to individuals and families by society through the instrument of government. Although such transfers have on a limited scale been in existence for a long time, the importance of social security grew in substance during this century, especially after 1950. Current social security programmes evolved out of social insurance schemes that had covered workers against selected risks imperilling their ability to provide for themselves and their dependants. Initially, foreseen contingencies were limited ones old age, involuntary unemployment and illness and benefits were tied to previously made contributions. Later on, in the second quarter of the twentieth century, both in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and in the United States of America, social security schemes were hailed as a means to abolish want.' Political compulsions, social solidarity and economic growth after the Second World War allowed these ideas to be implemented. mostly in developed countries, and, to some extent in developing ones. In centrally planned economies, the State assumed large responsibilities for reducing uncertainty and providing social security, Eventually, social security programmes matured into their present form, including assistance under a wider range of contingencies. Benefits were increased, coverage expanded and government support increased. Social security schemes were installed in several developing countries and their coverage was gradually extended.

As the variety of programmes multiplied, the term "social security"] came to have different meanings for different people even for those in the same country thereby rendering exercises in international comparison and analysis difficult.

In the United States, for example, the term "social security" strictly refers to the programmes established under the 1935 Social Security Act. These are programmes that offer protection against wage loss resulting from old age, prolonged disability or death (old-age, survivors and disability insurance (OASDI)). The expression is, however, frequently used by some in the United States to refer to a combination of the OASD1 programme and the Hospital and Supplementary Medical Insurance portions of the Medicare programme, which provides health insurance for the elderly! In some other countries, social security covers those public programmes that provide income security by compensating individuals in the event of a reduction in or loss of income, inadequate earning capacity or additional expenditure. Risks that are compensated for differ from country to country, although there is some degree of similarity as far as the contingencies covered across countries. For instance, as of 1990, more than 130 countries included some form of old-age, disability, survivors and work-injury benefits in their social security schemes. Unemployment benefits, however, were available in only 44 countries. 5 The contingencies included in social security payments or social protection payments are shown in table XV.1.


The fact that terms such as "social security", "social protection", "social assistance", "social insurance" and "welfare" are used interchangeably complicates matters even further. The 1993 System of National Accounts,' differentiates social assistance from social insurance, using the criteria of the source of funds. It defines the term "social assistance benefits" as comprising those transfers made by government to households, when the benefits are outside any social insurance scheme. Social security benefits, in contrast, are social insurance benefits paid to households out of social security funds?

The present chapter understands social security as comprising those programmes responding to the contingencies. with the exception of health care, identified in the 1952 ILO Social Security (Minimum Standards) Convention. There are two reasons for this. One is practical: As was seen above, most statistics on social security, as compiled by international organizations. do not cover health care. The other has to do with the different nature of the issues involved: Although the need for health care can entail substantial additional costs for workers and their families, which in many countries are met out of government resources, current concerns surrounding health care are somewhat distinct from those for social security. For instance, issues relating to incentives, allocative distortions and savings displacement are of special significance in current debates on social security policy but not as regards health care.

SOURCES OF INCOME TRANSFERS

The human life cycle is distinguished by a long period in which individuals earn a livelihood and two other periods. childhood and old age, in which they must depend on transfers. There are other, shorter periods in which persons may be unable to earn a livelihood, either because they are sick or disabled or because although willing, they cannot, find employment. Incomes may not accrue in agriculture because of crop failure, in fishing because the seas are too rough for fishermen to set out.

In recent years. the periods in which individuals do not earn incomes have lengthened, both because the number of years of formal education has risen and because people are living to a greater age than earlier. These two phenomena are common to developed, developing and transitional economies. In developed economies, both the level and the length of unemployment have risen, increasing the need to transfer larger incomes than earlier. In economies in transition, certain relatively generous social security arrangements, including unemployment benefits, have broken down as the Governments concerned design new institutions for market economies.

In most developing economies, the rapid decline in infant and child mortality rates a few decades back and the education of both male and female children have given rise to a young workforce seeking remunerative employment. In several developing countries, (Uganda, Zaire and Zambia, among others), young parents have died of HIV/AIDS infections, leaving many young children without income-earners to support them. Communities ravaged by war, as exist in Afghanistan, Angola, Cambodia, Mozambique and Somalia, have large numbers of disabled persons who need income support to survive. Extended and nuclear families, which have been central in providing emotional and income security to children, the aged, the sick and the unemployed, have been subject to rapid change everywhere and have reduced their role in these tasks. These considerations constitute the main reasons why the demand for resource transfers has risen. Social security arrangements are one source from which to satisfy that demand, as is shown below.

The family is the principal source of security in all contingencies (see table XV.2). It is a much more important source of income for young people than for those in any other situation. Youth at the stage of seeking first employment depend on parents more during that stage than at later stages in their lives.' A good proportion among the aged, certainly more than half of all aged persons in the world, depend on the family to provide them with the necessary resources. In the Marriage Law of China, it is provided that "in case children fail to perform the duty of protection, parents having no working capacity or living a hard life have the right to demand living expenses from their children". 9 Among the disabled, the family remains a major source of support.

There are currently many situations where the family may cease to be a source of resources. When young parents die, whether because of infection or in prolonged war, the welfare of children becomes a concern of the State. In sub-Saharan Africa alone, some 10 million children are expected to become orphans during the decade, because of the death of their parents from AIDS." Where children are born to a woman without either adequate income or a partner to supplement what income she does have, there is again a call on the State to ensure the welfare of the children. In Denmark and Sweden, nearly half of all children are born outside a formal marriage; in France and the United Kingdom, one quarter; in Belgium and the Netherlands, nearly one tenth; and in Switzerland, one sixteenth." In the United States, 21 per cent of all children in 1987 lived with a single mother, compared with 7 per cent in 1960." In contrast, where both husband and wife are wage-earners, and as more and more women join the workforce, the family can become an increasingly more important source of resources in times of unemployment.

Private savings, however mobilized, are available only to those who earn surpluses over current consumption. Among income-earners at large, only those in higher-income groups can be expected to have the capacity to accumulate sufficiently large resources to maintain themselves in old age and provide legacies for the well-being and education of their progeny. Among those accumulators, some will run out of their resources because they have outlived them or made imprudent investment decisions or because the savings were wiped out by inflation. In such situations, they are likely to fall back on the State as a source of transfer incomes.

Outside the formal system, informal or traditional social security arrangements play an important role in protecting uncovered populations against some risks, for example, burial expenses, and support for widows and surviving children. They cannot be entirely relied upon, however to offer satisfactory insurance against hunger and destitution.0 Providers are also vulnerable to the same shocks and uncertainties that may affect individual members of the community, for example, crop failure owing to natural disaster. The insurance base, despite some pooling of risks, may not be diversified enough, since arrangements are often confined to a small specific geographical area rather than to the larger State. With time, traditional arrangements may not survive. They are usually based on voluntary cooperation and can be easily terminated. Inroads by the market economy and an assertion of individual interests over those of the collective tend to undermine the basis of such schernes.0

Voluntary associations of various kinds provide income security. In many developing countries in Africa, a village or kin group may adopt a child and provide him or her with the resources needed for attending school. Philanthropic foundations provide support to young people, especially when they are pursuing higher education. Trade unions are often a source of some income during periods of unemployment, though a decline in trade-union membership reduces the importance of that source.li Friendly societies or neighbourhood associations are a common source of income security for the aged and the disabled.

In most societies, maintenance of children and persons in old age has been, and continues to be, the responsibility of working-age family members. The costs of such maintenance grew as periods of apprenticeship and learning lengthened and people survived to older and older ages. Periods of education have lengthened remarkably during this century, with the average number of years of formal education of the adult population having risen from about 6 to 13 in most developed countries.n That process is likely to be repeated at a faster pace in developing countries, within the context of currently continuing changes in the processes of production and management. Governments intervene when family incomes are insufficient to look after the needs of dependent children or when it is unfeasible, given the nature of capital markets, for children to borrow at reasonable rates of interest. Since the well-being and education of children are in part a social good, this is a further reason for society to use the instrument of government to provide the required resources.

Where the means are lacking for individuals or families to provide for old age, society again uses the instrument of government to provide such resources as will enable aged persons to lead a life that is not devoid of dignity.

In the United States, for instance, the average income of a person aged 65 years or over in 1983, during the period 1983-1989, was 41 per cent of the

 median income for the entire population (both incomes calculated before government taxes and transfers), and 84 per cent of the median income (both incomes calculated after taxes and transfers). In Germany, the effects of government intervention were even stronger: the respective proportions were 4 per cent and 81 per cent.

A special problem encountered in providing for the aged is that of women who in general live to an older age than men (see figures XV.1 and XV.2); that is to say, where old-age benefits are determined in relation to wages, the pensions of women tend to be lower than those of men, since on average women earn less than men during their working lives. When women depend on accumulated savings, again from lower lifetime earnings than those of men, those savings need to be spread over a longer period of time. Since survivors benefits constitute some fraction of the income received by a husband and wife, those benefits contribute a lower income than that received by a single man. Consequently, in two of the highest-income countries, Germany and the United States, older women were among the least economically well-off and ran a high risk of falling into poverty.17

 In all societies, employers are, next to the family, the most prominent source of income security. Wages paid to young people in their initial years of employment, when they are learning rather than contributing to output in a given enterprise, are a source of income to them. If they remain with that enterprise during their years of prime output, when they may contribute to its output in excess of their compensation, in some respects they pay back a loan to the enterprise.

Contributions paid to unemployment, old age and disability insurance by employers are a prime source of income security. However, these apply only to the person who is in the employ of an enterprise whose owner is some other person. The self-employed pay premiums out of personal savings. Furthermore. employees in small and low-productivity enterprises may lack surpluses, taking one year with another, out of which premiums can be created. In developing countries, where large numbers of people are in casual employment with very-small-scale enterprises, it is prohibitively expensive to launch viable income-security schemes.


LARGER DEPENDENT POPULATIONS

Dependent populations to whom incomes need to be transferred have increased over several decades and are expected to go on increasing, dramatically in some instances. over the next few decades. Demographic change accounts for a part of the increase; the changing composition of the needs of the dependent population accounts for another part and high rates of involuntary unemployment for a third part.

The proportion of the dependent population comprising both those under 15 years of age and those over 65 years of age in the total world population will continue to fall well into the future (see table XV.3). This will be the result of a fall in the pnipurt ion of those under 15 years of age combined with a much smaller rise in the proportion of those over 65 years of age. However, in developed countries, the proportion of the dependent population will rise from 33 per cent in 1990 to 37 per cent in 2025. That rise will be the result of an approximately 20 per cent decline in the proportion of those under 15 years of age and a nearly 60 per cent increase in the proportion of those over 65 years of age.

In developing countries, the proportion of the dependent population will continue to fall, from 40 per cent in 1990 to 34 per cent in 2025. That decline will be the result of a decline in the proportion of the population of youth, despite a dramatic rise of nearly 80 per cent in the proportion of the population over 65 years of age.

In the countries that belonged to the former Soviet Union, the proportion of the dependent population under 15 years of age will fall, as in developed countries. As educational levels are high and education is diversified, the increase in expenditure will be on account of the increase in the proportion of persons over 65 years of age.

These figures suggest at first glance that the total resource transfers needed the world over will continue to fall in the foreseeable future. Clearly, this will not be the case in developed countries nor, generally, in economies now in transition to market institutions. As more is spent on education, the volume of resources transferred to young populations, both for their maintenance and for their more costly, longer periods of education, will increase transfers to that age group. The average number of years of formal education of the adult population rose from about 6 to about 13 years in most developed countries between 1900 and 1990. This process can be expected to continue. As people live to older ages (see figures XV.1 and XV.2), the number of people living beyond 80 years of age will increase. The claims made on medical services and health care for people in these age groups will rise rapidly, compared with those in the lower-senior age groups." For the above-mentioned reasons, the demand for transfers will grow more than is indicated by the change in the proportion of the dependent populations.

In developing countries too, one can expect that the drop in the demand for transfer incomes will be less than is suggested by the projected drop in the proportion of the dependent populations. The same phenomenon as is occurring in developed countries will increase the demand for income transfers to people over 65 years of age. In addition, observe that the proportions of people over 65 years of age will be increasing so much faster, nearly doubling both in Asia and in Latin America between 1990 and 2025. Although the proportion of the population of youth in the less developed regions will decline by virtually one third between 1990 and 2025, educating them to higher levels will require large resources. In 1990, the estimated proportion of the illiterate population aged 15 years or over was 35 per cent in developing countries, compared with 3 per cent in developed countries. In the least developed countries the corresponding proportion was 60 per cent, in South Asia 54 per cent and in sub-Saharan Africa 53 per cent. To raise literacy alone, more resources will need to be spent on education. More students also need to complete secondary and tertiarylevel education. Furthermore, at both secondary and tertiary levels, larger proportions of students need to learn science, technology and vocational skills. The cost of each higher level of education is, per student, a multiple of that of the lower one and the cost of science and technology teaching is, per student, several times that in the humanities. Policies to secure universal primary education, and extend and diversify secondary and tertiary education will increase the total volume of resources that need to be directed towards these purposes.

Where individuals or families provide resources to children, the aged or the disabled, the volume of resources is determined by their availability. The same principle is honoured under pension schemes where contributions by individuals and the earnings of those contributions determine the level and duration of benefits. A very different situation emerges where the benefits are predetermined (and become entitlements) and resources need to be found to honour such commitments. Where contributions and their earnings are inadequate to meet those predetermined obligations, current contributions need to be increased or the level of benefits renegotiated. Those whose benefits were reduced would have every reason to complain that obligations due them were not being honoured and those whose contribution rates rise would have every reason to complain about unfair burdens, especially if their own benefits were likely to be scaled down in future.

The so-called old age crisis can therefore also be seen as an argument about the design of pension benefits. When should retirement begin? The later the retirement, the shorter the period during which a pension would be paid. With increased longevity, working lives can be expected to be lengthened well beyond 60 or 65 years of age. Since wage incomes increase generally over a generation and wages increase with age, the predetermination of pension benefits at a high percentage of terminal years' wages raises the level of benefits compared with that determined for a lower percentage of lifetime average earnings. The problems become more severe when wages decline or rise more slowly after a period of rapid growth, as they have done in OECD countries from 1974 until the present, following a period of prosperity (1950-1973).

The above-mentioned renegotiation of pension benefits would of course result in a lower level of well-being for the older generation than might otherwise obtain. Unsatisfactory as this is, it may represent what is affordable. Therefore, it is important that predetermined benefits, while ensuring protection against poverty and destitution, should not be set at levels that would not be sustainable without injury to the rest of the economy. They could be supplemented by wages earned, if the design for benefit payments was properly written out. Such lower levels of benefits would, on the one hand, reduce public sector current payments and, on the other, encourage individuals to raise savings in the economy. Lower government current payments might be a necessary condition for holding back inflationary pressures and increased savings, when invested productively, would help raise productivity.

Consequently, the sources of old-age incomes might be several: first, a minimum pension, provided by the State, financed out of contributions or taxes; an employment-related pension to complement the former and financed out of contributions; income from savings and drawdown of capital; wages out of parttime work; and transfers from family members.'9

SPREAD OF SOCIAL SECURITY PROGRAMMES IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES

Developing countries have achieved considerable progress over the past decades in making available formal social security programmes that protect their populations against some specified contingencies. As of 1990, approximately 150 countries had established some type of social security programme. The corresponding figure for the late 1950s was 80.23 The programmes, however, differ in their coverage. Not all contingencies foreseen in ILO Convention No. 102 are covered.

While most countries have some programme offering employment injury compensation, few currently extend unemployment benefits to their working population. Furthermore, in most programmes, coverage is commonly limited to workers in the formal sector, including those employed in large-scale enterprises, the civil service and the armed forces. In developing countries, a large share of the population still lives in rural areas and engages in subsistence activities. Among those who live in urban areas, many work in small-scale enterprises and in the informal sector. Neither of these large groups is usually protected under current formal arrangements.

Figure XV.3 is based on a sample of 35 developing countries and provides some information on the limited coverage extended by old-age pension systems in these countries. Less than 18 per cent of the economically active population (EAP) was covered in almost half of the countries surveyed (16 countries). There was considerable variation among the countries belonging to this subgroup and coverage was provided to less than 10 per cent of the EAP in nine of them. Most of them were sub-Saharan African countries with limited salaried employment and limited formal urban economies.

The extent of the formal economy can only partially explain the coverage: political commitment is also relevant.21 Almost all the States in India, for instance, have introduced (non-contributory) pension schemes for the elderly poor. In the State of Tamil Nadu, a third of the elderly poor was covered in 1990. Coverage for maternity assistance and survivors benefits were higher and reached at least 60 per cent of the poor in that year. Likewise, the pension scheme in Kerala State is estimated to cover the majority of the elderly poor. Benefits are usually low but they help beneficiaries to avoid absolute poverty.22 This notwithstanding, people living and working in rural areas with casual or irregular employment, and those self-employed or employed in the informal sector are normally not insured against social risks in many developing countries. This situation raises questions of equity in the existing systems, as a minority of the population, precisely those with relatively high incomes, are protected against many risks, while the majority are left to fend for themselves.

Social security benefits also vary considerably across different occupational groups, with the sectors that are better organized politically receiving more generous benefits and being protected against a wider variety of risks. Better political organization often coincides with employment in large-scale enterprises, the civil service or the military. In countries where both rural and urban working populations are covered, benefits accruing to urban residents are more diverse and of higher quality than those reaching the inhabitants of the rural areas. In China, for instance, social security benefits vary according to the place of residence and employment status. Most rural workers do not receive old-age pensions. Care for the old is a family responsibility and most of the elderly living in rural areas are supported by their children; but those who do not have children may count on a "social relief' programme, a system that prevents such people from falling into complete destitution. Recently, the Chinese Government experimented with pension schemes in rural areas; however, these initiatives have been restricted to township enterprises in the richer provinces.

The ratio of social security expenditure to GDP in developing countries is mostly less than 3 per cent. In several, the ratio was lower than 1 per cent.23 There is room to increase the coverage somewhat. However, these economies could not afford to extend their social security systems, as presently designed, to the entire population, even if efficiency gains were introduced into current systems. This is because of the large number of people excluded from current arrangements, the significant share in the economy of the informal sector (including the subsistence sector), the narrow tax base and administrative and technical constraints.

In many instances, the cost of contributing to the system is high in relation to earnings. Having to pay their own contribution and the employer's share, the self-employed end up paying more than those formally employed, who often earn more than the self-employed.24 The differences can be substantial. For instance, in Mexico, the self-employed pay 3.6 times what is paid by the salaried employed; in Peru they pay 3 times, in Jamaica 2 times and in Costa Rica 1.6 times what is paid by the salaried employed.n In addition, evasion may occur because the eventual pension benefit is low and there are bureaucratic entanglements delaying the payment of benefits. Extending entitlement to a share of the population that did not qualify previously can, in some instances, be financially disastrous. Those to whom benefits are to accrue at a date more remote as is the case with old-age pensions will tend either to delay enrolment or to not pay at all, leaving the programme without a sound financial basis. A state of affairs of this nature was reported in Tunisia when the Government extended social protection to the self-employed and agricultural wage-earners.n

In contrast, government workers, and employees of state-owned enterprises and of large collectively owned enterprises, most of them located in cities, are entitled to old-age anti disability pensions, sickness and maternity benefits and unemployment insurance. Additionally, they receive higher wages in the form of subsidized housing, education and health care.

In some developing countries in Latin America, South-East Asia and North Africa, social security coverage has been extended to agricultural workers and people engaged in the informal sector, such as domestic workers and some of the self-employed. Other countries have made voluntary coverage available. For instance, in Malaysia, there are voluntary schemes for domestic workers and the self-employed; in Tunisia, for the self-employed (against work injuries); in the Republic of Korea, for employees of firms with less than five workers and the self-employed (including farmers and fishermen). In Mexico, all persons not covered by old-age, disability and death benefit programmes sponsored by government are allowed to affiliate themselves on a voluntary basis.n Yet, coverage remains low.

Several factors contribute to such an outcome. Social security schemes require the regular collection of contributions, the timely recording of these collections, their safe and productive investment and the eventual payment of benefits in a timely manner, all at reasonable costs. The small scale of operations, informality of contractual arrangements, low levels of literacy and other factors contribute to the raising of transaction costs to prohibitively high levels.

One should also add a political constraint to the list of factors contributing to low coverage, as an increase in coverage may imply a redistribution of income, in the form of either increased taxation or reduced benefits, from the better-off to the less well-off segments in society. In societies characterized by sharp income inequalities where privileges are not easily given up, a sense of social solidarity may not be forthcoming to ensure the instituting of such extensions.

Even for those privileged to participate in formal social security arrangements, such arrangements may in many instances fail to deliver the defined benefits. The replacement ratio, by which benefits are determined as a percentage usually of the average of earnings during a period of three to five years prior to retirement, is quite modest in some countries. That ratio is about 40-60 per cent in sub-Saharan African countries, and usually higher in other regions") However, when the benefits are compared with final-year earnings, the replacement ratio can be actually quite a bit lower. In inflationary environments with no provisions for indexing the earnings base, the contributions made or the entitlement to be received, the drop can be quite sharp. The index chosen, when it fails to reflect changes in prices adequately, can be treacherous. In Brazil, for instance, contributions to and benefits from the pension system are indexed to the minimum wage, which usually lags behind the consumer price index in terms of monthly changes.

Low returns to investment of pensions funds are a common problem in developing countries. In many, there are rules requiring the investment of pension funds in government securities with very low or negative real returns. For Governments, it is a convenient source of funds to cover fiscal deficits. In many instances, money interest rates on such loans were below market rates with no provisions for inflation, while in some other countries, the government defaulted on the loans. In Togo, for instance, although the pension fund reserves seemed to be solid, the Caisse nationale de securite sociale had 20 per cent of its investments in loans to the Government in 1991, while the Caisse de retraites du Togo (covering the civil servants) held CFA 25 billion in government debt. Loans to government may not earn any real interest at all and may be difficult to recover owing to financial difficulties faced by the government.")

Social security funds have also been invested in bank deposits and real estate. While the former may have the advantage of being liquid, returns may not be particularly high. The latter may offer higher returns excluding public housing projects but liquidity can be a problem. Bolivian pension funds, for instance, have been partially invested in real estate. When these investments faced liquidity problems, property had to be sold quickly, fetching prices below market value, and thereby causing an even further deterioration of the financial position of these funds. In other countries, social security funds are invested in public sector projects in the health or housing sector. While social returns of such investments may be high, particularly when low-income segments of society benefit from them, they are usually not associated with solid financial returns. In some cases, rampant inflation, administrative constraints and lack of sound investment opportunities in underdeveloped or fragile capital markets have led to negative yields on investments. Real returns were negative in a number of countries during the last decade: Ecuador (-10 per cent), Egypt (-11.7 per cent), Kenya (-3.8 per cent), Peru (-37.4 per cent), Turkey (23.85 per cent), Venezuela (-15.3 per cent) and Zambia (-23.4 per cent)))


Social security funds also have been adversely affected by the economic developments of the last decade. Stabilization and structural adjustment had negative impacts on employment and real wages, undermining the contributory basis of social security systems in the above-mentioned countries. Countries with mature systems were the most distressed (see table XV.4). Other developing countries were successful in generating surpluses in their pension funds, mainly because they had relatively young systems with few people currently eligible for pensions and limited benefits. The magnitude of these surpluses should not be misread. Accumulated resources can easily be depleted by increasing benefits or extending coverage to other contingencies without proper funding.


IN 1981, CHILE INTRODUCED RADICAL REFORMS in its old-age pension system, moving from a publicly managed benefits-determined scheme to an individually capitalized contributionsdetermined system which was privately administered. Employees were given the option to choose between the public and the private systems and for those who opted for the private one, a premium, based on their past contributions to the old system, was paid in the form of treasury bonds (bonos de reconocimiento). New entrants into the labour market are obliged to subscribe to the private system, to which they contribute with 10 per cent of their gross earnings. Additional contributions of 2.5-3.7 per cent of their salaries are paid for disability and survivors benefits. The law does not require employers to contribute. Benefits depend on the contributions made and the income those contributions generate. At retirement, the accumulated capital and earnings can be used to provide a pension or to buy an indexed annuity. The State guarantees a minimum pension for those with a qualifying period of contributions (20 years), if by the time they reach retirement (65 years of age for men, 60 years of age for women), their accounts do not contain adequate resources to provide a predetermined minimum benefit (22-25 per cent of the average wage). The State also pays a pension for those who qualify under its social assistance programme, but the number of beneficiaries is restricted to 300,000.4

The accumulating resources are managed by private funds administrators (Administradoras de Fondos de Pensiones (AFPs)), under regulation by government. The AFPs are expected to compete among themselves, by offering low commissions and high returns, for contributors who are allowed to move freely from one administrator to another.

The system has been considered a success in many respects. Pensions currently offered are 40 per cent higher than those obtained in the public schemes. Coverage is universal: 93.4 per cent of the workforce belonged in an AFP at the end of 1993; less than 7 per cent of the active population remained in the old system.b By the end of 1994, the AFPs had accumulated funds equivalent to 45 per cent of GDP (the figure was less than 1 per cent of GDP in 1981) and real returns on investment averaged 13.7 per cent annually during the period 1981-1994,c

The Chilean example is being followed in other Latin American countries and reforms similar to those adopted by Chile are being implemented elsewhere in the region. However, there are factors particular to the Chilean situation. Chile has long had a social security system covering a large extent of its working population, most of it engaged in the formal sector. The fact that informal sector activity in Chile is limited has contributed to the universalization of the system. Privatization of pension funds does not increase coverage because it is formal sector employees who will be enrolled in the private pension funds. Informal sector workers will remain excluded. Voluntary schemes may be offered but there is no guarantee that people will contribute.

The Chilean Government has had an enviable record of delivering on its promises. Some other Latin American countries cannot lay claim to such a record. Moreover, the Chilean reforms were introduced during the Pinochet regime, whereas democracy is the dominant form of government nowadays. In 1992, the Uruguayan Government failed to have a much less radical reform approved by Congress. The proposal comprised, among other things, an increase in the retirement age and changes in the formula that established benefits. These proposals aimed at reducing the deficit of the social security system.d It took a long time for pension reforms to be adopted as they met fierce opposition in Argentina. The original proposal that it be compulsory for all insured persons over age 45 to enrol in private funds was dropped and the Government had to settle for a mixed system.

The lack of updated information is a major problem in many countries, especially in those that contemplate giving employees in the public system an incentive to move to the private one. Like those in Chile, the Peruvian reforms included bonos de reconocimiento which were based on the value and number of past contributions. However, given inadequate records, the length of the contributory working life of the employee had to be estimated by other means. For instance, the value of past contributions was obtained through sworn statement of employees. Given widespread evasion in terms of contributions, the State probably recognized higher contributions than it had actually been paid.e

The high real rates of returns obtained by the Chilean AFPs may be attributed in part to relatively well-developed financial and capital markets and the availability of attractive investment opportunities. The programme of privatization of state-owned enterprises during 1985-1988 was one such opportunity. Other countries may not have mature capital markets or equally attractive investment opportunities. The reforms in Bolivia have many of the same characteristics as Chile's. However, with very limited capital markets and undi-versified financial instruments, it is not clear how these resources will be invested. There is the option to invest these funds abroad: however, this option needs to be examined carefully, for it will not raise investment in the domestic economy. The failure among the 12 member States of the European Union in 1994 to agree to the free cross-border management and investment of European pension funds points to the inherent difficulties.

To support a replacement ratio of 70 per cent of earnings with a contribution of 10 per cent of earnings, as in Bolivia and Peru, it is necessary to earn real rates of return at 4.5 per cent per year for a period of 45 years. Such rates of return may not be sustainable in the long run.'

The reforms are costly and require intense state involvement in regulating, supervising and providing the necessary guarantees. There are a series of guarantees and benefits that the State has to honour (minimum pensions, social assistance, bonos de reconocimiento and others), without corresponding revenues, as employees transfer their contributions to the private sector. On the eve of reforms in Chile, social security funds ran a deficit equivalent to 1.9 per cent of GDP. During the first four years of the reform, the deficit widened, reaching more than 6 per cent of GDP in 1984. It has been slowly narrowing since then. These costs had to be absorbed by the government budget.

A worrisome feature is the high degree of delinquency in Chile. Although 94 per cent of the working population are members of an AFP, over 40 per cent default on their payments. It is not known if this lack of compliance is due to sickness and unemployment or to evasion. Employees might evade payment because they place a higher value on current consumption than on future consumption. They may also lack confidence in the system, despite government guarantees. The minimum pension guaranteed by government (although requiring 20 years of contribution) may act as a disincentive to the orderly payment of contributions A parallel problem is the value of the minimum pension itself At 22-25 per cent of the average wage, it may place low-wage workers well below the poverty line in retirement. Continuous delinquency puts the value of future pensions in jeopardy, even if the system succeeds in maintaining the present high rates of return. These factors raise the contingent liability of government entailing eventual financial burdens and renewed social problems within the country.

 For those who had paid for longer periods than estimated, there was the option to prove their having done so World Bank, Peru. Public Expenditure Review, report. No 13190-PE (Washington, D.C., World Bank, 31 October. 1994), p 68.

MARKET VERSUS GOVERNMENT

Providing income security is an area where the government and the market interact intensively. Both institutions respond to the same needs in society. In general, the income security needs of high-income earners can he met in the market. Savings can be accumulated, in many forms of assets, to provide an income in old age, to provide an income to one's progeny and to he drawn down in periods of adversny. Those assets will purchase the capital that helps raise output and producti% itv in the economy. Laws governing private property will ensure entitlement to income from these assets. Stable prices will assure savers that the value of their assets will not fall drastically in future. The desire to accumulate and acquire higher incomes will provide incentives to apply labour and use capital productively.

It was the demonstrated incapacity of market institutions to respond to the income security needs of the low-income receivers that prompted Governments to provide social security. Many among those who earn lower incomes fall into poverty in old age, because their voluntary saving are too low to support them after retirement. Even when savings are high, injudicious investment decisions can wipe out the value of the assets of these people. There is also the matter of the improvident, whom society may not wish to punish through the denial of resources for survival in old age. Furthermore, market institutions that mobilize personal savings may, because of either mismanagement or dishonesty, end up dissipating those resources. Inflation will do pretty much the same. Persons with a disability may not have assets against which to borrow. Unemployment is not an insurable risk because in cyclic troughs it becomes the fate of large collectivities at one and the same time. Capital markets are not an effective source of capital for children as regards their obtaining resources until such time as they begin to earn incomes.

In providing social security, government policies impact heavily on both labour and capital markets on labour markets, by raising the cost of labour, by raising the reserve price of labour and by implicitly imposing a minimum wage. The regulations that govern entitlements to some forms of social security payments and their amounts may also affect incentives to save and accumulate among those with lower lifetime incomes.32 Assuring incomes to young people raises the productivity of labour both by improving their physical well-being and by enabling longer periods of education and training. By providing transfer incomes, Governments change the terms under which persons will offer their labour in the market.

The interaction between these two sets of institutions (government and market) was accommodated so long as the incomes of most of the persons affected rose rapidly, so that virtually everyone gained by participation in the scheme. As growth in incomes slowed down, as contributions of the working population for the maintenance of the non-working population increased, and as government failures came to be highlighted in the same way as market failures, social security policies came to be questioned. The loss of control over non-wage incomes in centrally planned economies, as private property came to cover increasingly larger parts of these economies, seriously undermined the capacity of the Governments concerned to provide social security. Electorates based on universal franchise in developing countries questioned the virtue of social security schemes that covered only the more affluent in their societies.

Is the role of government then limited to the imposition of compulsory participation in social security schemes and the supervision of market organizations that will administer these funds in competitive markets? For some eventualities such as prolonged periods of unemployment and care of the orphaned, there are no working markets. For other eventualities, even if market instruments are used, there is no compelling evidence that direct costs of managing pension funds are lower in the private sector than in the government.

Where there are capital markets of substantial breadth and depth, savings

 are generally allocated to investments with greater efficiency by private sector agents than by government. In such instances, private sector savings can be effectively mobilized by market institutions. Consequently, the net cost to society of privately managed funds may arguably be less than is shown by figures of direct costs. Investment of private sector savings in pension plans has an additional advantage: as those savings come out of incomes paid to an economic agent and may not be viewed as taxes., the burden of dead-weight losses of taxation is thus removed. There would also be a direct and visible relationship between that agent's behaviour and the disposal of his or her resources.

Costs of management are an important consideration in deciding upon terms for the management of income security arrangements. Such a consideration is important in deciding between alternatives between government and market institutions, as well as structures within government. Well-managed government social security schemes are highly efficient. In Norway, the costs of managing are 2.1 per cent of contributions; for the Employees' Provident Fund in Malaysia, the corresponding figure was 2.5 per cent in 1990;33 for the Central Provident Fund in Singapore, the figure was a meagre 0.53 per cent.' The proportion of those costs can also rise ranging from 10 per cent in Jamaica to 50 per cent in Zambia. In the privatized system in Chile, most recent estimates of costs of management have been 3 per cent of contributions.

In a centralized system there is the tremendous advantage that rights are "portable" and do not reduce labour mobility within the economy. There is a lesson here for the highly fragmented social security arrangements among enterprises, county administrations, and municipal, provincial and central Governments established in China. Management can indeed be centralized: however, access to offices by contributors and beneficiaries at a reasonable cost and with reasonable convenience is also an essential condition in administrative arrangements, especially in countries that are large in size, as well as in those where transport to the administrative capital is costly and inconvenient.

There are instances where government sector investments would raise productivity in the economy more than private sector investments. Furthermore, if a general downturn in economic activity, although seemingly banished in capitalist economies since the 1930s, was to occur, the contingent liability of government would be no different from what would prevail with a social security programme in effect.

While the role of markets may have become somewhat strengthened, the roles played by the family, voluntary agencies and government have not lessened as societies have changed and income distribution have become more skewed.

CONCLUSIONS

Social security policies have been a principal means of reducing uncertainty in individuals' lives and in mitigating poverty in developed countries. These same objectives were achieved in centrally planned economies under different arrangements. In several developing countries, both in South-East Asia and in Latin America, much progress has been made towards achieving these objectives. In other developing countries, there are many forces that do not yet permit a shortened march towards them.

The rise in the proportion of the ageing population is matched by a fall in the proportion of the population of youth, both in developed economies and in economies in transition. In developing countries, the proportion of the dependent population will fall in the foreseeable future. Although some of the gains in these dynamic processes will be lost through the higher costs of educating for longer periods and of diversifying education, the total burden does not seem as formidable when only the proportion of ageing populations is considered. Clear statements making transparent the nature and extent of the transfer of resources between generations consequent upon social security arrangements would contribute to better-informed choices by the public.

As regards mitigating poverty in old age during periods of mass unemployinent among families with children in adverse circumstances, among orphaned children and among those disabled in large-scale conflicts, Governments will hear the main responsibility. Besides, Governments, by formulating and implementing appropriate policies in the proper circumstances can, encourage economic agents and markets to undertake some of the functions that, often less efficiently, said Governments carry out themselves. Maintaining stability in t he general price level by maintaining macroeconomic balance, in order to enable markets to provide institutional support to economic agents in providing resources to meet the above-mentioned contingencies, is one of the most important roles of goverment. Reforming laws and regulations internalizing mechanisms to ensure compliance with, and minimize evasion of, the relevant legal provisions is yet another.

The use of markets for meeting some of the requirements of dependent populations requires the presence of working financial markets, including insurance markets. The formulation of adequate regulations and their enforcement remain prime responsibilities of government. In well-functioning financial and capital markets, with inflation under check, individuals are likely both to save a higher proportion of their income and to receive higher returns on their savings.

In addition to government programmes and private savings, families and voluntary associations will remain important sources of income security in all, ocieties. These sources are given special emphasis in many South-East Asian developing countries.

The direct costs of management of pension funds by government are in many instances remarkably lower than those incurred by organizations in the market. There are also instances, mostly in developing countries, where these costs are prohibitively high. In such instances, there are no market institutions whose costs can be used for purposes of comparison. However, indirect costs, including benefits forgone, which accrue when markets may invest these funds more efficiently, are not known.

As all economies attempt to grapple with these problems of social security policies, there is much that can be learned by an exchange of acquired experiences.

 

The world economy is in a slowly accelerating growth path. It has not yet attained the more rapid and sustainable rate of growth that it is capable of, although such growth appears to be on the horizon for 1997. Within the global expansion that has already been realized, economic growth impulses are spreading to an increasing number of countries. At least 109 countries, with a combined population of 5.3 billion (all but some 300 million to 400 million of the world's peopIe), are expected to see output per capita rise this year.
Results such as these have been building since the dismal early years of the 1990s. The new numbers reflect a very encouraging and dynamic trend in some countries; for other countries, however, the numbers represent a minor or incipient improvement of the most difficult of circumstances. In certain countries, violent political situations have eased. In many developing and transition economies, domestic adjustment programmes are beginning to bear fruit. Meanwhile, despite rising income per capita, some of the richest countries in the world, especially in Europe, have not been able to significantly reduce their inordinately high unemployment rates, while highly prized social safety nets seem no longer affordable in several developed countries or are seen by Governments as being beyond reach.

The world's gross output of goods and services is expected to grow about 21 per cent in 1996 for the third year in a row (see table 1.1). This is a lower rate of expansion than the world average of the 1980s. Nevertheless, it represents a considerable improvement compared with the first three years of the decade.
Those years were marked by economic recession in the developed economies;
economic collapse and some instances of war in the transition economies; and drought, war, violent conflict and difficult economic adjustment in many developing countries (although others grew rapidly).
One year ago, a somewhat higher world growth rate - 3+-4 per cent - was forecast for 1996,1 a rate that is now expected to be attained in 1997. The acceleration of world output growth has been postponed in effect by a slower growth trajectory of the developed economies in 1995 and 1996 than was earlier foreseen. That is, instead of growth rates of gross domestic product (GDP) of 2% per cent in 1995 and 3 per cent 1996, there was an actual growth rate of 2 per cent in 1995 and 2 per cent is now expected in 1996 as well.
The growth rate of GDP of the developing countries in 1995 was very close to the forecast (5.2 per cent achieved, compared with 5 per cent forecast), while the forecast for 1996 is now even higher (51;2 per cent is being currently forecast, compared with 5 per cent forecast one year ago). In addition, the 2 per cent growth rate currently expected in the economies in transition in 1996 equals that forecast one year earlier, while the output decline of 1.8 per cent was less than had been anticipated in 1995.
It is noteworthy that the developing and transition economies have been outperforming the GDP growth rates that were projected one year ago when it was thought that growth in the industrialized countries would strengthen. This suggests that domestic factors have been important sources of economic growth in many developing and transition economies and that some of the developing and transition economies have been relatively successful in the international market-place. Indeed, these countries are increasingly seen as important markets and potential stimuli to growth in the developed economies. Nevertheless, other countries - developing and transition economies - have not yet pried loose from the "low-level equilibrium" trap of high poverty and low growth.
The international economic environment has continued to offer greater opportunities for economic growth to countries that are positioned to take advantage of it. The volume of world merchandise imports grew 10.3 per cent in 1994, and an estimated 8.5 per cent in 1995, and import growth is expected to be buoyant again in 1996 (71;4 per cent), even if less so than last year (see annex table A.19).
In addition, global financial flows continue to mushroom. The world total of international medium-term and long-term credits (bonds, bank loans and related facilities) rose almost one quarter in 1995 to $832 billion (see annex table A.31).
Developing and transition economies together accounted, however, for little over 10 per cent of these arrangements. Many countries do not enjoy access to such funds, as their capacity for additional debt servicing precludes such borrowing.
They require direct investment and official financial flows. A special case, and one in which aid delayed or denied is especially costly, is assistance to countries emerging from recent conflict situations. These countries also require official credits and grants. Unfortunately, in general, the prospects for official development assistance (ODA) are bleak.
U~~v~~lo,pe:d economies: slow Q"i"'o,",th hut no recession Several developed economies, such as Canada, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America, entered the 1990s by slipping into economic recession (see annex table A.2). As these countries began to recover, others went into recession, including France, Germany, Italy and Japan. By 1994, most developed countries were on a path of recovery, although in some cases - that of Japan, in particular - it was closer to economic stagnation. The recovery in Europe and Japan was expected to broaden in 1995, while the growth of GDP was expected to slow somewhat in the countries that were further advanced in their economic cycle.
In the event, growth slowed down more than expected in the countries further advanced in their cycle; it slowed instead of increasing in Western Europe; and output barely rose in Japan. Unanticipated exchange rate appreciation in Japan and Europe seems to have been part of the reason. While the degree of overvaluation of currencies in the first half of 1995 has been reduced, the overall rate of economic growth in 1996 is not expected to surpass the 1995 rate, and only a modest improvement is expected in 1997. In this regard, the current economic cycle is unusually weak: the year of strongest recovery (1994) produced an overall growth rate that was less than the average growth rate of the entire 1980s (table I.l).
In framing their macroeconomic policy stances, Governments have sought to establish conditions for sustainable growth over the medium term. They have thus sought to squeeze inflation from their economies, consolidate fiscal deficits to meet policy goals and strengthen the confidence of financial markets in the soundness oftheir policies. Japan has been a special case, as its economy has had to absorb a financial crisis that caused massive losses of wealth and rocked the banking system. Large-scale government efforts over several years to restart the economy have had disappointing results.
In some dimensions, the macroeconomic policy strategies of the developed economies have been a success. With the exception of Germany and Japan, fiscal deficits have fallen relative to GDP (annex table A.8) and monetary policy in 1994 and 1995 slowed the growth of demand, as intended. Policy makers then reversed course and cautiously eased monetary conditions during 1995 and early 1996 to avoid pushing their countries into recession. While economic growth was less than expected, it has thus remained positive overall.
Success on the inflation front has been dramatic. Consumer price increases have been held below 2.5 per cent per year on average since 1994, despite recovering demand and substantial increases in petroleum and other international commodity prices (see annex tables A.7 and A.21). A further slowing of inflation is forecast for 1996.
Meanwhile, progress on other economic fronts has been disappointing. First, there has been virtually no reduction in the overall rate of unemployment in the developed countries since it peaked at 8 per cent of the labour force in 1993 (table A.6),2 although last year when the economic growth outlook was more optimistic, virtually no gain had been expected in 1995.3 Unemployment seems to be driven mainly by structural factors.4 Second, paralleling the unemployment developments has been a relative stagnation in real wages. Moreover, while this has been a major contributor to the low inflation rate, it has also been a factor in the slow economic growth, since wage income is an important determinant of household expenditure and thus of aggregate demand and production. Furthermore, the investment in high-technology equipment and the policies of companies in "downsizing"
their operations - especially in the United States ----' have raised fears of unemployment, which are hard to assuage when workers who are made redundant cannot find comparable employment opportunities or rising wage levels.
Finally, the fiscal consolidation imperative has reduced prospects for important discretionary government spending on economic, social and cultural activities in many countries. Indeed, several Governments have been reassessing how to fully meet their non-discretionary spending commitments, in particular with regard to social security, broadly defined. These problems do not lend themselves to facile solutions, but instances of labour militancy and voter dissatisfaction are increasingly underlining the incompleteness of the existing policy package.

The depth of the plunge in economic activity that accompanied the collapse of central planning first in Central and Eastern Europe and then in the former Union of Soviet Socialist Republics is hard to grasp and harder to measure.
Considering the economies of these countries as a whole, total output measured one third less in 1995 than in 1990.5 This may well overstate the extent of the decline, but a different signal of the severity of the shock was that, taking all these countries together, population growth abruptly declined in the 1990s (see annex table A.l). This year, however, is expected to mark the end of economic contraction and the resumption of economic growth in the transition economies taken as a whole.
In fact, all the Central and Eastern European transition economies (CEETEs) and the Baltic States had begun growing by 1994. Many - but not all- had strong rates of economic growth in 1995, with further strong growth forecast for 1996 (see annex table A.3). The economic situation has been much more difficult in the countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), where output continued to decline in 1995, albeit less rapidly than in earlier years. Only the barest beginnings of growth are foreseen in 1996 and there is so much uncertainty surrounding that prospect that forecasters would not be surprised if the outcome was, instead, a further contraction of output.
The differences in growth rates among the transition economies reflect the different nature, extent and consistency of the policies implemented. All the countries faced sharp inflation jolts when prices were first allowed to rise and the value of credits extended to enterprises - both formal loans and interenterprise arrears - exploded, as firms sought to cope with their new, unplanned environment. Policy makers thus had to focus on regaining macroeconomic control (on both limiting the growth of the money supply and reining in burgeoning budget deficits) as they at the same time promoted the institutional transformation of their economies - which included turning state enterprises into corporations and privatizing them, rebuilding the banking and financial system on market-oriented principles, overseeing and supporting the foreign-exchange market, reorienting foreign trade, introducing legal reforms and so on - all the while seeking to cope with the social consequences of economic dislocation.
Initially, especially in the CEETEs, the major growth impetus was expected to come from exports to Western Europe. However, there are now solid sources of growth in the CEETEs themselves. Consumer demand, initially satisfied by imports, is increasingly being met by domestic production, and investment is picking up. Industrial productivity is also rising. Yet the unemployment picture remains serious and inflation rates, although falling, remain high (see chap. II).
There is a measure of international market confidence in most of the CEETEs. They have seen considerable inflows of foreign exchange, either as portfolio investment (responding to high local interest rates) or foreign direct investment (attracted by a skilled and relatively low-wage labour force and a relatively developed infrastructure). As a result, foreign-exchange reserves in most countries of the region have jumped.
In many ways, the Russian Federation has also made remarkable progress:
inflation has fallen, foreign-exchange reserves are high, private economic activity is advancing strongly. Yet, little economic growth is forecast for 1996 and that with considerable uncertainty. Continued decline should not be completely ruled out. Confidence in the stability of the economic and administrative environment appeared to be weak; for example, significant uncertainty was said to surround the possible economic policy consequences of the presidential election in June 1996. If uncertainty in the business community over future policy was reduced and the country invested the considerable resources that are leaving or being held in the form of foreign exchange, the outlook would be very much brighter. Indeed, the human resources and much of the infrastructure that is so essential for economic growth are for the most part readily available in the Russian Federation. In contrast, the short-term prospects for a resumption of economic growth are small in many other countries of CIS.
Uc~vc~lolping economies: economic is SpJrelulIn,2;
CDP per capita rose in 71 developing countries in 1995 out of the 93 countries whose data are regularly monitored, and 75 countries are expected to belong to this group in 1996 (see table 1.2). This represents a substantial rise from the 50 countries in 1993. The improvement in the spread of economic growth is also quite dramatic measured in terms of the population. In 1995, almost 90 per cent of the population - or 4 billion people - of developing countries were living in countries experiencing rising average CDP per person.
In 1996, 96 per cent of that population - or 4.3 billion - are expected to be in this category.
Rising per capita output is thus not a phenomenon that is limited mainly to China and the rapidly growing economies of South and East Asia, where, indeed, almost the entire population lives in countries with rising GDP per person. The least developed countries in particular have made significant gains in this regard in 1995 and are expected to advance further in 1996: at least 21 economies out of the 48 least developed countries, with 78 per cent of the total population in the group, registered growth in per capita GDP in each of these two years. This is quite an encouraging development if set against the experience of the early 1990s, when only about a dozen least developed countries, with about half their population, were in this category.
The gain in countries having rising per capita GDP has been most pronounced in Africa, where recovery from very poor conditions began in 1994.
By 1995, 67 per cent of the population lived in countries with growing per capita GDP. This proportion is expected to increase to over 87 per cent in 1996. In Latin America, after the sharp economic slow-down in 1995, per capita GDP growth is becoming much more widespread in 1996, extending to 95 per cent of the population.
Interpretation of this development must be tempered, however, by two sobering facts: in many countries the growth of per capita GDP has been small and the average levels of per capita GDP in most regions still remain below what they were in real terms in 1980. At the regional level, per capita GDP
growth was negative in Latin America and negligible in Africa in 1995. In 1996, it is expected to average %per cent in Latin America and 1¥2 per cent in Africa (see table 1.3). In both Latin America and Africa, the rate of per capita CDP growth in the majority of countries experiencing growth was under 2 per cent in 1995 and 1996. In addition, per capita GDP in real terms in both regions in both years has remained below that in 1980. A similar pattern in the magnitude of per capita GDP growth and long-term comparison of the levels of per capita GDP can be seen in the least developed countries.
Another interesting development, as was noted above, is that developingcountry growth rates strengthened overall in 1995 despite the slower-than~
expected growth of the developed countries, their primary trading partners.
Indeed, the volume of developing country exports is estimated to have grown more rapidly in 1995 than in 1994 and if the Survey forecast is borne out by events, 1996 will be the third consecutive year of double-digit expansion in export volumes of developing countries (see annex table A.19). This reflects the success of some developing countries in establishing markets for their goods in developed economies - taking advantage in particular of the continued strength of demand for computer-related electronics - as well as the increasing sales of developing countries to other developing countries.6 Developing countries have also been assisted by the firming in 1994 and 1995 of international commodity prices, which are expected to remain relatively strong in 1996. In addition, direct foreign investment flows to developing countries have virtually exploded in recent years. In 1995, the net direct investment in the capital-importing developing countries is estimated to have reached $64 billion, although it was highly concentrated in a small number of countries. In 1990, the total investment had been $17 billion?
These developments notwithstanding, international flows of portfolio financing to developing countries were temporarily jolted by the balance-of-payments crisis in Mexico at the end of 1994 and the crisis of confidence it spawned.
However, flows, most of which go to the "emerging market" economies encouraged first by the very quick and strong commitment of the international community to Mexico and other countries with large international financial exposure that had been following adjustment regimes, as well as by the sharp policy changes implemented by Mexico itself during 1995 - resumed by the second half of 1995.
All in all, the trade and financial flows that are essential to an internationally open economic development process appear to be evolving in a very promising manner. Certainly, countries are continuing to protect politically sensitive industries from foreign competition, perhaps most persistently in the agricultural sector, and the international regime for trade in services is far from settled.
On the other hand, the World Trade Organization is emerging as a significant venue for dispute settlement procedures as well as for negotiation of trade agreements, and developing countries are participating increasingly in its activities; in addition, a more pragmatic approach has also been evolving in the Bretton Woods institutions with regard to alleviating more effectively the debt-servicing burden of some of the poorest developing countries, although concrete proposals have yet to be acted upon (see chap. III).
One essential component of the international package of development cooperation efforts, however, is seriously weakening before its time, namely aDA.
All indications attest that the flow of aDA will continue to show a shrinking overall donor commitment to development assistance in coming years. This is not a uniform development, as certain donors are committed to significant increases in their aid effort; but with recent reductions of flows, especially by one of the largest donors, the total amount of concessional resources to be spread among the countries needing and deserving this assistance will be stretched much too thin.
aDA is meant to serve not as income support for poor countries, but as investment support, development support, support in particular for activities that are everywhere the responsibility of the public sector, such as education and health. In addition, aid is warranted for special circumstances - postconflict situations being a case in point - wherein the private sector bypasses countries because conditions are too unsettled, too dangerous, too risky. In almost all cases, the alternative to aDA financing of a project is no financing, and no project.

In addition to reviewing the current global economic situation, the World Economic and Social Survey seeks to foster international discussion of economic and social issues with a significant policy dimension. In this regard, the current Survey includes a major study of investment, in particular business fixed investment, the backbone of development in a market economy. The Survey also reviews for a general audience selected issues bearing on social and economic development policy that have been a focus of international analysis.
A persJpe,ctive on investment in the world's economies Additional investment is the answer - or part of the answer - to most policy problems in the economic and social arena. Investment does not, however, automatically occur in the desired amounts or the desired locations or the desired producing sectors. As investment is a significant policy concern in developed, developing and transition economies, it was made the focus of the main analytical part of the current Survey.
The point of departure in this study of investment is the recognition that the subject is rife with such theoretical and statistical complications as the analyst would do well not to ignore, and that to understand investment as a policy issue it is useful to bring to bear upon the subject the broadest variety of considerations, which can best be put forth in the context of a series of case histories.
Several such cases were drawn up from the experiences of developed, developing and transition economies, and include discussions of investment in four countries in post-conflict situations that reflect the special concern about this group of countries within the United Nations. Such conclusions as emerged from the various clusters of cases analysed are presented in the appropriate chapters.
Some dimensions of economic and social change 
Four issues were singled out for review under the part of the Survey that selects specific dimensions of economic and social change for analysis. The first issue pertains to how demographers at the United Nations monitor and project urban growth, a salient topic in light of the extensive apalysis based on these data that has been used in papers for presentation at the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II), (Istanbul, June 1996).
The second issue, which also has an urban dimension, concerns how developing countries - where electricity demand is growing fastest - are seeking to expand their electric power supplies and provide electricity more efficiently in a world of increasingly scarce resources. Attention focuses on the efforts to create and utilize economic incentives for efficient energy production, transmission and distribution.
The third issue addressed in this part of the Survey raises questions about safe water supply, a matter highlighted by the United Nations Water Conference, held in Mar del Plata, Argentina, in 1977, and the continuing follow-up activities to the Conference in the General Assembly and elsewhere. The emphasis in the water study is on experiences with respect to creating economic structures and institutions that raise the incentives for more efficient use of water and move it most effectively from those places in which it is relatively abundant to those where need is greatest.
Finally, the Survey takes up a burgeoning but elusive component of international trade, namely business services (communications, computer software, financial services and so on). Services as a general category constitute a large and rapidly growing share of global economic activity; but as services are "invisibles", they are less readily measured than merchandise. The study thus sought to track the development of the trade in business services by identifying the major suppliers and purchasers, but it quickly became necessary to confront the dilemma arising from the fact that services can be provided across borders in any of several ways, among which only one falls under the traditional rubric of international trade.
There are two striking features of the present world economic situation.
The first is that the growth of economic activity has become more widespread. The second is that growth seems to have the potential to be sustained in a large number of countries.
The geographical spread of economic growth began to manifest itself in 1995. In that year, world economic activity in aggregate grew at the same rate as in 1994, but the growth rates of almost two thirds of the developing countries increased. In addition, five of the seven Central and Eastern European economies grew more rapidly than in 1994. In the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), there was a continuation of the decline in output, but the rate of contraction slowed.
Counterbalancing these improvements, there was a slow-down that occurred mainly in the developed countries and, among them, mainly in the seven major economies. In addition, there were especially difficult recessions in certain Latin American economies.
The year 1996 is expected to see a continuation of this pattern of more widespread growth. The rate of growth of output is forecast to rise in about half the developing countries in 1996. The least developed countries in particular are expected to see an overall rate of growth that will be more than twice their average in the 1930s, largely reflecting the improvement in the economic situation in Mrica.
Growth is expected to continue in the Central and Eastern European countries and output is forecast to rise in each of the Baltic States. It is also possible that rising economic activity will be registered by CIS
for the first time since it was created, although considerable uncertainty surrounds the projections in that case. Meanwhile, the developed countries are forecast to have much the same· growth rates, as in 1995 albeit distributed differently.
Current international economic conditions are providing an opportunity for growth that many countries have been able to capture.
Inflation remains in check in the developed countries and in other countries where it has recently been brought down to acceptable levels.
Elsewhere, it is generally on a declining trend, having slowed dramatically in the transition economies and the developing countries as a group. In the world at large, the macroeconomic imbalances that have impeded the struggle against unemployment and poverty in a large number of countries have increasingly been brought under control.
The past few years have demonstrated that the present overall economic environment provides an opportunity for most countries to generate self-sustaining impulses towards national economic growth.
Faced with this encouraging prospect, Governments confront two challenges. The first is to translate this growth into reductions in unemployment and poverty. At the same time, policy makers need to ensure that the growth impulses themselves are not short-circuited or derailed.

In the developed economies, the cyclic upswing in economic activity lost some momentum in the course of 1995. The slow-down in Australia, Canada, New Zealand, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America was not unexpected, as those countries were the first to emerge from the previous recession. In continental Europe, however, the recovery of 1994 and early 1995 virtually stalled in late 1995. Indeed, there was a significant drop in activity at that time in several countries, including Belgium, France, Germany, Sweden and Switzerland. At the same time, after four years of almost no growth in output, the Japanese economy has started showing signs of recovery (see table 11.1).
Economic activity has been growing more slowly in the current recovery than during the previous two cyclical expansions. This sluggish pattern could be attributed partly to policies. Governments and central banks have given the highest priority to achieving and maintaining a stable macroeconomic environment and thus have adopted a cautious economic stance.
In countries whose previous recession is further behind them, such as Canada, the United Kingdom and the United States, tighter monetary policy had already been initiated in 1994 by the central banks in order to forestall the overheating of the economy and the strengthening of inflationary expectations.
At the same time, the marked rise in interest rates on world capital markets that followed the economic upswing in most industrialized countries in 1994 made itself felt; but market interest rates turned around again at the beginning of 1995. None the less, owing to the usual lag, they provided little stimulus to economic growth last year. Except for Japan, where the Government put together a spending package of record size in September 1995, fiscal policy has been directed at curtailing budget deficits. At least in the short term, this will act as a brake on demand.
The flagging of the upswing in the course of 1995 can be attributed to several factors, besides the tighter policy stances noted above. In Japan, the size of the yen's appreciation in the first months of last year, the continuing need to absorb the losses from fallen land and stock prices in the corporate sector and a weakness of consumer confidence are considered major reasons why the massive fiscal policy stimuli, coupled with record low interest rates, failed to ignite the economy until well into 1995; thus, stagnation persisted much longer than expected. In continental Europe, there were currency turbulences in spring 1995, which were at least partly induced by uncertainty about the future of major economic policy parameters in the run-up to Economic and Monetary Union (EMU). These turbulences clouded the economic picture and may have dampened investment activity.
Nevertheless, the late 1995-early 1996 decline in economic activity has likely been a mid-cycle dip rather than the onset of a new recession. The distinct fall in policy-determined as well as long-term interest rates in the course of last year, the fading of the effects of the 1995 currency swings in Europe, and the fall in the exchange rate of the yen since late summer of 1995 have given grounds for expecting that economic activity in the developed countries will pick up gradually during 1996 and show moderate growth at a rate of around 2.5 per cent through 1997. North America, Europe and Japan are likely to follow a similar pattern, though the acceleration in Japanese activity is arriving earlier than in the United States and even earlier than in Europe. Hence, for the first time in many years, all major countries may show a relatively synchronized expansion.
The recovery in the developed economies will continue to be supported by buoyant exports to many developing countries. Indeed, the role of the developing economies as a source of growth for the developed countries has increased steadily.
The increase in real gross domestic product (GDP) in the industrialized countries, although more synchronized, will nevertheless remain quite low. The Western European economy is forecast to grow almost 11 per cent in 1996, while Japan and the United States are expected to see growth rates of about 2 per cent (see annex table A.2). Indeed, in the United States, it would be unlikely for the monetary authorities or the financial markets to allow much faster economic growth. Moreover, in Europe, fiscal policy will remain tight in order to meet the Maastricht criteria for monetary union, while in Japan, a shift from a stimulative to a neutral fiscal stance cannot be excluded in the remainder of 1996 or 1997 given the widening budget deficit, which is already relatively high as a percentage GDP compared with most other industrialized countries (see annex table A.3).
With moderate growth, consumer price inflation is likely to remain under 2.5 per cent during 1996 (see annex table A.7). This rate of inflation is roughly in line with the long-run target for inflation that is being followed by the major central banks.
A particular feature of the present cycle is that increased output has not led to commensurate increases in real wages. This has been one of the major factors involved in holding inflation down to its present low levels. Yet, this restraint in real wage increases means that consumer spending has not played as large a· role in stimulating economic growth as in previous cycles. It also raises questions as to whether businesses that might be encouraged to invest by restrained growth in labour costs will in time be discouraged instead by sluggish consumer demand. In short, contemporary labour-market conditions make households cautious, reduce "consumer sentiment" and hold back the growth of consumption expenditure which accounts for roughly two thirds of GDP in the developed economies.
Persistently high unemployment and growing income inequality are related concerns for policy makers. Indeed, only in the United States and the United Kingdom, among the seven major developed countries, is the current unemployment rate below its average of the 1980s. The situation is particularly serious in Western Europe. where the unemployment rate rose from 8 per cent in 1991 to 11 per cent in 1994 from which point it has barely receded (see annex table A.6). Even in the United States, where the 1995 unemployment rate fell to 5.6 per cent and in Japan, where open unemployment is still quite low compared with that in other countries, a slow growth of wages and a fear of unemployment among those working have come to characterize much of the labour market.

In 1995, the United States economy grew by 2 per cent, the slowest increase since the recession year of 1991. After a slow-down in late 1995 and early 1996, caused mainly by weaker consumer spending, lower levels of inventory accumulation and a decline in government expenditures, the economy appears to be moving forward again, albeit at a modest rate. Inventory correction, which was a major drag on growth through much of 1995, has likely run its course.
Consumption growth is expected to return to a level close to income growth, at 2 per cent in real terms. Although consumer confidence is down from levels reached in 1995, it is still relatively high (see figure ILl).
Housing has been responding to the declines in interest rates that have taken place over the period to early 1996. The boost from these earlier rate drops may fade, however, fade in the course of the year. Indeed, long-term rates have been subject to upward pressures since January 1996. Business investment has been the main driver of the recovery since the last recession.
However, capital spending slowed significantly in late 1995 and is not likely to improve much this year. Nevertheless, it could grow faster than the overall economy. At the same time, exports will likely continue to make strong gains, while imports are expected to slow along with the deceleration in equipment investment. Hence, in 1996, on a net basis, international trade may contribute to growth for the first time since 1991. All told, the United States economy is likely to be on course for sustainable non-inflationary growth at an annual rate of about 2 per cent through 1997.
After recording growth rates of close to 5 per cent in 1994, the economy of Canada slowed markedly to 2 per cent in 1995 owing to the tightening of interest rates. The major source of growth was exports which offset falling final domestic demand. The only domestic demand component that showed relative vigour was investment in machinery and equipment. The external sector and equipment investment are likely to continue making a considerable contribution during the next two years. Besides, a firming trend in jobs and falling interest rates could lead to gains in consumer spending and housing activity.
Hence, a gradual increase of growth could be expected.
The slow-down in Australia, unlike that in Canada, was less abrupt. The main factors slowing the economy last year were a deceleration of private fixed investment and inventory correction. The economy seems to be further slowing down slightly in 1996, mainly owing to high interest rates and government spending cuts. It is likely to pick up slightly in 1997, with investment and net exports being the main sources of renewed growth.
Japan is pulling out of the longest economic slump in its post-war history.
The· combination of low interest rates, a fiscal boost and. currency depreciation helped put the economy on a recovery path. GDP grew significantly in the last three quarters of 1993, ending at a rate of 3.6 per cent in the last quarter (see table ILl).
Growth in Japan has accelerated despite a shrinking in its trade surplus.
Hence (as was not the case in the past), domestic demand, rather than exports, is leading the expansion. Government spending from a record fiscal package announced last September underpinned much of the growth in late 1995 and early 1996. The impact of this fiscal stimulus will recede significantly towards the end of 1996 as almost 60 per cent of total spending is to be concentrated in the first half of the year. However, the growth of economic activity is becoming more broadly based, as increases in private capital formation and consumer spending appear to be continuing. The private sector has begun to respond to repeated government attempts to revive the economy, thereby providing some assurance that the recovery will not flag once the public spending diminishes.
At the same time, Japan has yet to overcome historically high unemployment, weak land prices and, most important, an overhang of bad property loans that are the legacy of the speculative bubble ofthe late 1980s.
The growth of economic activity in Europe slowed sharply in the second half of 1995 and into early 1996. The recovery from the 1993 recession had largely depended on exports and an early-cycle increase in inventory investment. Subsequently, as final domestic demand remained relatively weak, the slowing in external sources of demand and the deceleration in inventory-building caused the slow-down. Initially, the weakness was concentrated in Germany and France and other countries whose currencies remained closely tied to the deutsche mark.
The easing in both short- and long-term interest rates should encourage a recovery in activity from mid-1996 on, with internal demand increasingly becoming the driving force of the expansion. As was not the case in several previous. years, there is likely to be relatively little difference in the growth rates of European economies between this year and 1997. Despite the high level of slackness, Europe's growth is not expected to rebound strongly because fiscal policy is scheduled to stay tight as countries prepare for EMU. Weak growth will keep inflation below 3 per cent and unemployment is likely to recede only marginally if at all.
In France and Germany, the growth of exports and private investment, which sustained demand in 1994 and early 1995, slowed down significantly in the second half of 1995, while private consumption remained sluggish. With inventory drag fading, economic activity seems to have stabilized in the first half of 1996. Reflecting the weak activity at the beginning of the year, GDP
growth is likely to be only about 1-11 per cent in 1996 and then to accelerate slightly into 1997. In both countries, conditions for an upswing in investment look favourable as profits remain high while interest rates have substantially decreased. In Germany, rationalization, rather than expansion, will continue to be the most important motive for investment, as there continues to be widespread concern over high labour costs. Owing to the soft labour-market conditions, as well as fiscal consolidation measures, consumption growth is likely to be moderate in 1996 and 1997 in these countries. Exports are not likely to make meaningful contributions to growth owing to the strength of their currencies and sluggish foreign demand.
Strong currencies and the slow-down in Europe dampened real GDP growth at the turn of 1995 in Austria, Belgium, Denmark, the Netherlands and Switzerland. Their recovery is likely to proceed in line with that in Germany, with stronger impetus coming from domestic demand.
Contrary to these developments, some of the countries that had earlier undergone a depreciation of their currencies relative to the deutsche mark continued to show solid, albeit slower, GDP growth. In the case of Italy, Spain and Portugal, the fading of the boost from previous devaluations has been partly offset by rising domestic demand as their currencies appreciated and, except in Italy, interest rates moved lower. Indeed, while export growth has been declining, investment is still strong and household spending is picking up. By contrast, currency appreciation in Sweden is undermining growth as falling exports coincide with subdued domestic demand.
The economic upturn in the United Kingdom, another country whose currency had depreciated earlier, was also driven by exports in 1994 and early 1995. Since then, export growth has been held back by a strengthening of the pound, particularly against the deutsche mark. At the same time, there has been a healthy rebound in consumer spending and housing investment, supported by steady growth in real disposable incomes, lower interest rates and, to a lesser extent, a modest reduction in taxation. In addition to already strong investment in machinery and equipment, there is likely to be a pick-up in nonresidential construction. Thus, the British recovery is definitely becoming more domestic-based.

Having more confidence that inflation has been brought under control, policy makers in the developed economies have turned their attention to trying to ensure that non-inflationary growth is sustained. This led to a general easing of monetary policy during 1995 and early 1996, when the developed economies paused. Besides, there was· a significant decline in market-determined interest rates. By mid-1996, however, amid the signs of improving growth, monetary policy will likely have entered a period of stability; and if the pick-up in growth is sustained, a modest round of tightening through 1997, as well as an upward move in long-term interest rates, could not be excluded. At the same time, fiscal stances remain restrictive in Europe and North America, as deficit reduction policies continue to receive most attention, while in Japan the effects of the earlier fiscal boost to the economy are probably coming to an end.
The monetary authorities of the United States have sought to fine-tune monetary policy, so as to sustain the expansion, yet avoid the inflationary pressures that a more robust rate of growth might produce. As the United States economy has enjoyed since early 1991 both an extended period of positive growth and low inflation, the conduct of monetary policy can be judged to have been very successful. The Federal Reserve raised short-term interest rates a number of times in 1994 to slow the economy. Then from July 1995 through February 1996, when it judged that the economy was decelerating too quickly, the Federal Reserve gradually lowered the federal funds rate 0.75 percentage points to 5.25 per cent. The current low inflation environment has allowed the Federal Reserve the virtually unprecedented move of relaxing monetary policy during a period in which a recession is neither present nor foreseen.
In response to the drop in rates, the United States economy appears to be picking up in the first half of 1996 prompting the monetary authorities to put on hold any further easing. At the same time, there have been some concerns that the current growth rate is too low. It has been argued that the economy can grow faster without inflation accelerating, since (as was not the case in the past) there seems to be little wage inflation at the current rate of unemployment.
Hence, it has been suggested that interest rates should be eased further.
One consideration that militates against this conclusion is that the new method of measuring GDP growth results in a lower figure than would have obtained using the old method (see introduction to statistical annex). Also, some argue that it is still too early to make judgements as to whether structural changes in the United States economy will allow faster growth than before without risking an increase in inflation.
Fiscal policy has already achieved a reduction in the United States budget deficit in the last three years. At the same time, the budget negotiations for the fiscal year that ends in September 1996 failed to reach a conclusion until April 1996. Agreement has still not been reached on how to balance the budget in the longer term. In the forecast presented in this Survey, fiscal policy in the United States is assumed to be essentially neutral in the sense of not imparting an impulse to economic growth.
In the face of a slowing Canadian economy, the Bank of Canada has aggressively eased monetary policy, cutting its key funding rate by 1.25 percentage points since end-October 1995 and leaving monetary conditions at their most accommodative since early 1994. Monetary relief is important as the economy is still weak and as further major fiscal reductions are planned. That is, fiscal policy has been set to achieve a balanced budget in 1998, as against the deficit of 4 per cent of GDP in 1995 and deficits of higher percentages of GDP in each of the two previous years. Indeed, the contractionary effect of fiscal policy in Canada is relatively greater than the much discussed fiscal consolidation in Europe.
Fiscal tightening is also planned in Australia. Yet the inflation picture and the balance-of-payments deficit make it difficult to ease monetary policy there.
In New Zealand, after the successful implementation of fiscal consolidation, income taxes will be cut for low- to medium-income working families starting in July 1996. Meanwhile, monetary policy, which tightened at the end of 1994, will stay restrictive. According to the monetary authorities, the continuation of strong growth may bring the inflation rate to the top of the 0-2 per cent target band that the Reserve Bank of New Zealand is required by law to meet.
As already noted, the Japanese authorities have undertaken several demand stimulus measures of unprecedented magnitude in the past several years to alleviate the difficult economic situation. In 1995, the Government introduced three additional emergency fiscal packages; the last one, announced in September, amounted to $132 billion. Once the September fiscal package is completed, the Government may be inhibited from taking further expansionary measures in 1996. Given a sharp deterioration in public finances and the ageing population that will add considerably to the fiscal burden of pensions in future years, the Government is likely to restart fiscal consolidation as soon as possible. The increase in the consumption tax scheduled in 1997 is the first step towards this goal. The economic recovery expected in 1996 and 1997 should also help the consolidation through producing an increase in tax revenues.
The public debt has risen relative to GDP because of the deficits incurred in implementing the fiscal packages announced since 1993. This now leaves much less room for fiscal manoeuvre.
The Bank of Japan lowered the official discount rate from 1.75 to 0.5 per cent during 1995. The challenge for the monetary authorities in 1996 is to carefully guide market interest rates towards support of economic growth; that is to say, the sustainability of this recovery should be assured before deciding on the timing of any changes in monetary conditions.
Expectations for economic recovery in 1996 and 1997 have already pushed up long-term interest rates in Japan. This may dampen the still fragile revival of business investment and depress residential investment, which is now showing relatively high growth. On the other hand, there is concern about how long the official discount rate should be kept at the lowest level in the post-war era.
As of now, this level seems justifiable and necessary to boost private investment as well as to aid the financial sector, which has been forced to absorb the cost of a wave of bad loans. Besides, consumer price increases are about zero, while the GDP deflator is still falling. In the course of the next two years, how~
ever, the recovery is expected to lead the monetary authorities to tighten the currently loose monetary policy.
It is increasingly argued in Japan that deregulation and liberalization of the economy should proceed further to accelerate and smooth the recovery. It is deemed of special importance to introduce more market-based and competition enhancing policies to the non-tradables sector, whose productivity growth has lagged. The challenge for the authorities is to design policies that would improve the supply capabilities of both the financial and the non-financial sector without a further worsening of the fiscal situation.
In 1995 and early 1996, in most European countries, faced with a rate of growth much slower than the authorities had expected, monetary policy was eased. Initially, interest rates were cut in several steps in Germany as well as in Austria, Belgium, Denmark, France, Ireland, the Netherlands and Switzerland, countries whose monetary policy usually shadows that of Germany, in order to maintain a stable exchange rate against the deutsche mark. The declines have been very significant. For instance, in Germany, the reductions have brought the Bundesbank discount and Lombard rates to levels last reached in December 1987, while in France, the intervention rate of the Banque de France has come down to 3.3 per cent, a level not seen in more than 30 years. Also, in Finland and Norway, monetary policy is assuming an increasingly stimulative stance owing to a very benign inflation outlook.
Monetary policy in several other European countries had been kept tight somewhat longer in order to counter inflationary tendencies and stabilize the exchange rate. By late 1995 or early 1996, however, more positive price movements as well as limited currency appreciation allowed Portugal, Spain and Sweden to begin cutting interest rates. At the same time, in Italy, monetary policy continues to be very tight. Despite official interest rate declines in most developed economies, the Bank of Italy has not loosened monetary policy, as inflation is still running high and fiscal consolidation prospects remain uncertain.
Key official interest rates have remained unchanged since May 1995 and as of April 1996 were about 2.5 percentage points above their level in July 1994.
In the United Kingdom, in order to prevent inflationary pressures resulting from relatively fast economic growth, the base rate of the Bank of England was raised in three steps from 5.25 per cent in September 1994 to 6.75 per cent in February 1995. From then until December 1995, a "wait and see" policy on interest rates was maintained as the economy grew more slowly than in 1994, but still above 2 per cent per annum. It was unclear whether the inflation target (2.5 per cent or less) that was set by the Government would be met. The pause ended on 13 December 1995. Between then and April 1996, the base rate was reduced in three steps to 6.0 per cent based on signs that the slowdown in growth might be deeper and last longer than had previously been expected by the Government, as well as on an improvement in the probability of achieving the inflation target. Besides, falling German interest rates lessened the downside risks to sterling. After 75 basis points of monetary easing in four months, the most likely prospect is for an extended period of interest rate stability.
Overall, the monetary stance in Europe will most likely not be changed substantially through 1997. However, although monetary policy is clearly accommodative, the level of real rates may still be too high to permit a self-sustaining recovery, especially in the context of fiscal retrenchment. Indeed, the thrust of fiscal policy in Europe will remain tight in 1996-1997 as countries have been taking steps to put their public finances on course in order to meet the budgetary criteria under the Maastricht Treaty for entering the single European currency area at the start of 1999. A further, although less severe, deficit reduction is planned for 1996 in many countries, including Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Greece, Italy, Portugal, Spain, and Sweden. Because these budget cuts are smaller in relation to GDP than those previously effected, and because German fiscal policy will be slightly stimulative, the fiscal impulse in Western Europe as a whole is likely to be lesscontractionary in 1996 than in the previous year. However, greater fiscal tightening will be seen in 1997, the critical judgement year for meeting the Maastricht criteria for monetary union.
This implies a continued bias towards fiscal constriction in Europe.

In 1995, six years after the process of transformation had begun for the countries of Central and Eastern Europe and four years after the process had begun for CIS and the Baltic States, a fairly clear picture emerged of macroeconomic trends in the very disparate group of countries whose common feature is, indeed, this transition.
In most countries of Central and Eastern Europe, the sharpest declines in output took place in 1991, and 1993 was the first year of positive growth (see annex table A.3). The exceptions were Poland which saw the sharpest decline in output in 1990, but positive growth in 1992, and Bulgaria, which first saw output grow in 1994. All these economies grew in 1995. Only two had relatively low growth in output - Hungary at 2 per cent and Bulgaria at 2.5 per cent.
All the other countries grew at considerably higher rates than any of the major developed economies and appear set to repeat this relatively favourable performance in 1996. Output growth was restored in the Baltic States in 1994 and, with the exception of Latvia in 1995, those States continued to grow in 1995 and are forecast to grow in 1996.
In CIS, the rate of economic decline slowed appreciably in 1995. It had earlier been expected that 1996 would be the first year of economic' growth but, based on recent data for the Russian Federation, this now seems quite uncertain (see below).
Central and Eastern El1lro>pean transition economies Of all the Central and Eastern European transition economies (CEETE), and indeed of all the economies in transition, Poland was the only one that by 1995 had come close to regaining its pre-transformation (1989) output level (see table II.2). Even after the strong growth forecast for 1996, all other countries will still be more than 10 per cent below their output level of 1989.
Poland shifted rapidly towards market-based decision-making immediately following the beginning of the transformation and is now seeing the results in the form of high growth, improved domestic balances and substantial exports.
Perhaps even more significant, the composition and quality of production in Poland, and increasingly in all the CEETEs, are also much improved.
In the CEETEs, the private sector has been rapidly expanding. The overall business environment has improved because of the reduction· in inflation, the liberalization of prices, a revival of intraregional trade and stability in policies even after elections produced changes in government.
The positive economic growth rates did not lead to commensurate rises in aggregate employment as productivity increased. Real wages have also risen, but often by less than the increases in productivity. The renewal and expansion of the capital stock and improvements in training and manage ment made possible the increases in productivity that were evident when output expanded.
The expansion in output appears to be broadly based with industry, services and agriculture all growing. Domestic producers of intermediate and investment goods appear to be benefiting from the upturn in fixed investment, particularly in machinery and in the housing sector, while producers of consumer goods appear to be faced with relatively greater competition from imports, particularly in those countries where there has been a significant appreciation of the exchange rate.
Rising investment reflects growing confidence in the stability of the macroeconomic and regulatory environment. It may also reflect export opportunities associated with deepening links with the European Union. With greater macroeconomic stability, domestic and foreign investors are increasingly attracted to the combination in many CEETEs of low labour costs and large, underutilized supplies of skilled labour.
The balance between the demand components underpinning CDP growth has thus shifted from an earlier, almost exclusive reliance on exports to fastergrowing consumption and particularly investment.
Inflation has receded further in the area, although rates are still in the double digits in most of the CEETEs. Contributing factors included a slow-down in the growth of nominal wages which, together with higher productivity, has reduced the pressure from unit labour costs; currency appreciation; and exceptionally favourable movements in seasonal food prices.! Prospects are for inflation to decelerate further: output and productivity are set to continue rising, wage increases remain moderate, producer prices have increased less than consumer prices and ongoing privatization should increase competitive pressures on pnces.
In some countries, however, there are low inflationary pressures coming from rapid growth in output and from the increase in money supply that accompanied substantial capital inflows, attracted by interest rate differentials with Western Europe. In the Czech Republic, Hungary and Poland, the removal of some of the remaining exchange controls facilitated these inflows. As they did not wish to lower interest rates, affected countries had to allow the continuing moderate appreciation of their currencies. One way to achieve this was through a gradual reduction of the cumulative monthly rate of the pre-announced nominal devaluation of the currency, which thus appreciates in real terms. Another of these measures was to widen the band within which the central bank aims to keep the exchange rate.2 Some central banks also engaged in open market operations to reduce the impact on the money supply.
Official unemployment rates remain at rather high levels ranging from 16 per cent in Poland to 4 per cent in the Czech Republic, although employment growth is picking Up.3 For countries with high shares of employment in agriculture (Albania, Bulgaria, Poland and Romania), a substantial decline in aggregate unemployment will only come about if the labour-shedding expected in this sector is more than offset by the rapid expansion of employment in indus try and services. In the remaining countries, extended economic growth should be capable of reducing the unemployment rates to single digits.
In 1995, privatization continued to be aggressively pursued in the CEETEs and receipts often exceeded the original targets. Hungary, in particular, sold practically all of its larger telecommunications companies to foreign corporations and received $3.24 billion. It had originally expected the sale to net $1.54 billion.4 In Bulgaria and Romania, measures were taken to expedite the privatization process,s in response to the sluggish implementation of mass privatization laws decided upon previously.
Some CEETEs are seeking to accelerate privatization in the banking sector.
With many domestic banks struggling with debt-ridden portfolios, potential demand for their shares when privatized is rather weak. One of the most urgent reasons for privatizing the commercial banks remains the expectation that this will bring greater efficiency and better business practices to the sector.
The policy thrust of the CEETEs towards full market economies is well reflected in their economic integration initiatives. Thus, in November 1995, the Czech Republic became the first transition economy to become a member of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), followed by Hungary in April 1996. A major objective of many of the CEETEs goes much further, namely, to meet the conditions for joining the European Union (EU). After a successful conclusion of the Intergovernmental Conference of EU - in late 1997 perhaps - EU negotiations with individual countries seeking entry might be started. 7 In itself, this will give a particular direction to future policy in the CEETEs - sharp limitations on inflation, budget deficits and exchange-rate instability - while working rapidly towards a relatively liberalized environment that allows the state sector only a limited direct economic role. Already by December 1995, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland and Slovakia had declared the convertibility of their currencies to be at the level required for accordance with article VIn of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) Articles of Agreement.

After several years of consistent economic policy and relative political stability, the three Baltic States have also made considerable progress towards becoming market economies. Estonia and Lithuania exhibited stable, if modest, growth of GDP since 1994 (see table A.3), while Latvia's tentative recovery was disrupted by the banking crisis of 1995. As a result, contrary to earlier forecasts, Latvia's GDP declined in 1995. Nevertheless, GDP is expected to grow in all three economies in 1996.
Recovery of output is increasingly driven by internal consumption, fuelled by both investment and consumer demand. For the Baltic countries, this is especially important, since during the early stages of transition, their growth was in a major part predicated on the re-export of Russian oil, metals and raw materials (30-45 per cent of total exports of Estonia and Lithuania) and on offshore services for Russian capital (Latvia). Neither of the two could provide a stable long-term foundation for sustainable growth. The opportunities for reexports evaporated with the depletion of accumulated stocks and with the Russian Federation's instituting much tougher customs control on its borders.
Most important, however, was the almost complete realignment of Russian internal and export prices for oil, metals and other previously lucrative reexport items.
Latvia had taken advantage of another kind of temporarily beneficial, but ultimately detrimental, opportunity. In their quest to make Latvian banks a depository for Russian (and other CIS) offshore capital, the banks offered inordinately high rates of interest on deposits, thus attracting substantial capital inflows. Non-residential short-term deposits constituted about half of total bank deposits. Operating under a very limited supervision by the monetary authorities, the banks pursued a risky lending policy by, for example, not securing their loans with adequate collateral. As a result, a substantial portfolio of bad debts was accumulated. This kind of exposure and the resulting difficulties borne by the banking system proved detrimental to overall economic activity in the country.
Inflation remains disappointingly high in all three countries. Prospects for its significant reduction are remote owing to the forthcoming liberalization of certain sectors (such as utilities in Estonia). Imports, in particular those of capital equipment, are growing rapidly, while exports are constrained by overvaluation of national currencies. The real exchange rate in each country has appreciated considerably since the beginning of the reform; based on consumer prices, the real exchange rate of the Estonian kroon vis-ii-vis the United States dollar has appreciated by over 200 per cent from mid-1992 to the end of 1994, and Latvia's lat and Lithuania's litas by nearly 350 per cent.
Is the Russian federation's economy ~·O"'l'\Iin/;1;!
By late 1995, the Russian Federation seemed well on its way to macroeconomic stabilization and recovery of output. Some experts, both in the Russian federation and outside, even predicted that the country might attain very rapid growth as early as 1997.9 These assessments were based on a number of positive developments in the country's economic performance and on the implementation of the Government's economic programme during 1995.
Indeed, for the first time since the start of transition, macroeconomic stabilization appeared to be holding consistently. There was no repeat of the negative experience of the earlier years of reform, when progress in reducing inflation during the early part of a year was each time negated by a surge of inflation in the autumn months following a burst of credit creation in late summer and early autumn. In 1995, consumer price inflation was 131 per cent (December over December) compared with 220 per cent in 1994 (see table 11.3). In February and March of 1996, monthly inflation was kept at 2.8 per cent - which implies an annual rate of 40 per cent if continued for the year as a whole - the lowest figure since the start of transition.
Containing inflation has been the direct result of the relatively tight monetary policy of the central Government. The federal budget deficit was brought below 3 per cent of GDP compared with almost 11 per cent in 1994. In addition, over the last two years, the Government has significantly reduced the inflationary financing of the budget deficit, in particular by abandoning the traditional reliance on massive credits from the Central Bank of Russia. Instead, the Government is selling bonds on the rapidly expanding market for government securities and drawing extensively on loans from international financial institutions. The financial instruments offered in the domestic market were diversified, and steps were taken to encourage banks to channel their funds into the government securities market. To this end, a currency "corridor" was introduced in summer 1995 which by allowing the exchange rate of the rouble to fluctuate only within set limits instead of freely, thus making profits from currency arbitrage significantly less certain. Also, the increase in bank reserve requirements reduced the funds that banks had available for such speculation.
The decline in output, as recorded in national accounts and industrial production data, seemed to finally bottom out in 1995. The officially reported decline in output notwithstanding, it is widely believed that the economy had in reality already been growing through 1995. That is, a major share of output, in particular that produced by unregistered economic activity, was inadequately reflected in the officially reported data.
Indeed, there are many indications - both in published data and from anecdotal evidence - that the economy of the Russian Federation has begun to grow. There were first, tentative signs of growth of output and productivity in a number of industries, both in export-oriented sectors (ferrous metals, chemicals and petrochemicals, fuel and energy) and in primarily domestically oriented ones (engineering, metal-processing, automotive). Housing construction was up 9 per cent in 1995, with privately financed construction becoming the prevalent method of supply. By early 1996, private consumption also showed evidence of increase, as reflected in increased retail sales. Also, the dollar value of exports in 1995 grew by 18 per cent, which after strong growth earlier brought the share of exports in total sales of domestically produced goods to 34 per cent.
In sum, even if contraction of output persists in many sectors of the country's economy, prerequisites of the resumption of growth are there and, if growth pjcks up later in the year, a small positive rate of growth is possible in 1996 (see annex table A.3). What is urgently needed is adequate investment.
As shown in chapter VI of the present Survey, domestic saving is estimated to be adequate to provide this investment; but for this potential to become reality, the economy urgently needs stabiljty in its political, regulatory and administrative environment. Uncertainty, in particular political uncertainty, remains the major obstacle to investment and therefore to an immediate start of sustainable economic growth.
At the same time, evidence of an increased confidence in the economic and financial situation could be seen in the rouble exchange rate. The rouble appreciated 72 per cent against the United States dollar in real terms in 1995, while the ratio of domestic currency in circulation to foreign currency reserves grew for the first time since reforms had begun: from 40 to 77 per cent.l1 This notwithstanding, the social situation remains very difficult, although it appears to be stabilizing. By early 1996, the process of polarization of incomes reportedly paused, while average real incomes resumed growth. Unemployment growth slowed down, although by February 1996 over 6 million, amounting to 8 per cent of the workforce, were out of work and looking for a job. The share of wages in monetary income continued to drop rapidly - from 40 per cent in 1994 to 30 per cent in 1995, while income from business activity grew to 48 per cent. The number of people reportedly living below the poverty line declined 22 per cent during 1995 and by year-end stood at 36 million. Certainly, the social security system is strained. Arrears in payments to pensioners became a major subject of political discussion. The country now has 37 million pensioners, constituting 20 per cent of the population (compared with 18.5 per cent in 1989).
Thus, four years after economic transformation was launched in the Russian Federation, it is obvious that the social and human costs of the transition have been very high. Though specific qualitative indicators could be questioned, or interpreted in different ways, it is beyond doubt not only that significant groups of the population had seen their real incomes plummet, but that their entire established way of life - with its familiar mainstays, such as accessible medical service, reliable social security system, and guaranteed employment had crumbled around them.
An intense debate goes on in the Russian Federation on whether these costs were an unavoidable, if painful, component of a long-overdue socio-economic reform that will in the end produce positive results, or rather the unforeseen at least by the proponents of that reform - outcome of a misguided economic policy. These very issues are being debated as this Survey goes to press in the context of the presidential elections in the Russian Federation.
It would seem that the first viewpoint is broadly correct. Indeed, amid a constant stream of negative data on the socio-economic situation in the country, it is easy to overlook the impressive path already covered in four years towards establishing a more efficient and flexible economic mechanism. The transformation is far from being over, however, and the fluidity of the situation makes for wide margins of error. However, the potential for the long-range resumption of economic growth is unmistakable.
Other countries in the Commonwealth of Inlcl.e]peJlld;ent States The economic situation in the other countries of CIS is uniformly very difficult.
Only two CIS countries reported that their economies grew in 1995; however, these being Armenia and Georgia, their expansion was accounted for primarily by a measure of revival of output after a catastrophic decline in earlier years (see table II.3). In Uzbekistan and Kyrgyzstan, the GDP decline is probablybottoming out. In the other CIS countries, aggregate output continued to shrink at an annual rate of approximately 10 per cent or even worse.

There was a notable weakening of inflation in a number of CIS countries, in particular Armenia, Kyrgyzstan and the Republic of Moldova, owing to rather strict stabilization policies pursued by their Governments. Other countries (Belarus, Tajikistan) continue to experience high inflation.
In Ukraine, the new leadership that took office in summer 1994 in the midst of a prolonged and steadily worsening economic crisis immediately initiated long-overdue economic reforms. The first steps were aimed at containing the mushrooming budget deficit that had been created, in major part, by credit subsidies to State-owned enterprises. Prices were gradually liberalized, basic market institutions began to be introduced, and a privatization programme was finally launched. These measures have broken the country's slide towards hyper-inflation and a disastrous collapse of output and, perhaps more significantly, generated a perception of the return of positive dynamics in economic policy.
In one of the more visible and important results of the new leadership's effort to reform the economy, monthly inflation was brought down from 72 per cent in November 1994 to single digits by the end of 1995. Consumer prices for the whole of 1995 grew 182 per cent (see table II.3). The first months of 1996 saw inflation pick up speed again, but this time it was largely the result of the intentional upward correction in the levels of prices in service and utility sectors aimed at bringing them closer to cost recovery.
Nevertheless, Ukraine's output continues to shrink in 1996, albeit at a slower rate. In 1995, GDP contracted 12 per cent compared with 23 per cent a year earlier. Industrial output fell 11.5 per cent (27 per cent in 1994), while agricultural production fell 4 per cent.
Ukrainian policy makers have chosen to introduce economic transformation measures gradually, and believe that growth of industrial output should remain a major aim of economic policy.That approach was reiterated in major policy declarations made by the country's President in June 1995.
Accordingly, the Government of Ukraine has developed a 20-25 year ProFive years ago, the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia began to disintegrate. A
middle-income developing country and one of the principal leaders in the non-aligned movement, the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia had led in the experimentation with market forms of socialism. The descent into political disintegration and war coincided.
with the entrance onto the path of transition to a rket economy. The scale of intensity and destructiveness of the conflict -- p osnia and Herzegovina and, to a lesser extent, Croatia -- has been unequall Europe since the Second World War.
In 199Z, economic sanctions were imposed by the Security C I against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia' and Montenegro) for its role e war in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Generally speaking, the situation in 1996 in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, Slovenia and The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia is the most hopeful since the disintegration of the former Socialist federation. Open hostilities ended in Bosnia and Herzegovina with the signature in Paris on 14 December 1995, of the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Annexes thereto (collectively the Peace Agreement) (docu A(50/790-S/1995/999, attachment);
the Basic Agreement on the Region of Easte ia, Baranja and Western Sirmium, signed at Erdut, Croatia, on 12 November 1995, provides for the peaceful reintegration of Eastern Siavonia into Croatia following a period of United Nations Transitional Administration; and sanctions against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia have been suspended.
The economy of Slovenia, the State with the highest per capita income, has experienced the least disruption in the past five years. Following short-lived hostilities in the summer of 1991, this country of about 2 million people" has seen its economy grow since 1993. It has undergone an economic transition process akin to that in the rapidly reforming economies of Central and Eastern Europe. Inflation was high in the early years, exceeding ZOO per cent in 1992, but macroeconomic adjustment programmes have quickly brought down the inflation rate and single-digit price increases are forecast for 1996 (see table). Unemployment, however, reached 15 per cent of the labour force in 1993 and is expected to remain in double digits this year.
Slovenia's GOP growth in 1995 was driven by exports and investment; labour productivity increased by about 4 per cent. Economic activity in 1996 should be further boosted by the restoration of traditional markets as a result of the Peace Agreement. This will improve prospects for exports and further stimulate investment.
The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, comprising Serbia and Montenegro, with acombined population of about 10.5 million people, was the target of United Nations sanctions from 199Z to 1995. It also suffered the sharpest collapse of production, almost 50 per cent in two years, 199Z and 1993 (see table). Inflation reached almost 9,000 per cent in 199Z and over one fifth of the labour force has been unemployed throughout this period.
Asharp adjustment programme stopped inflation in 1994, albeit temporarily, and output began to recover from the depths of the collapse. Immediately after the suspension of economic sanctions, a 15-point stabilization programme was put in place. its provisions included lowering the exchange rate of the dinar to its black-market level and moving closer to the time when it couid be made convertible, introducing market-determined interest rates, ending state monopolies in foreign trade and industry, accelerating privatization, removing quotas on exports and imports and reducing customs duties.
The restoration of its access to markets should lead to a boom in trade and boost industrial and agricultural output. Five years of unsatisfied demand are likely to fuel strong private consumption growth; investment in the country's damaged infrastructure - especially electric power, railways, roads, water resources, gas supply and heating system networks- will be another stimulus to growth.
Recovery may thus begin in earnest for which reason output has been forecast to grow 12.5 per cent in 1996. However, unless decommissioned military personnel can be rapidly absorbed into the civilian economy, the unemployment rate will not come down substantially in the immediate future.
From 1991 to 1993, the economy of Croatia contracted by 25 per cent, in the midst of the disruptions of war and transition. In 1993, inflation exceeded 1,500 per cent and the unemployment rate was over 17 per cent. In two years, however, a credible adjustment programme based on afixed nominal exchange rate and tight fiscal policy broke inflationary expectations and brought the annual inflation rate down to 2 per cent, albeit at the expense of postponed economic recovery and employment. Continuing implementation of sustainable economic policies and progress towards the peaceful reintegration of Eastern Siavonia following the 1995 Erdut agreement may lead to substantial economic growth in 1996. Inflation is forecast to remain quite low.
The economic prospects of The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia also brightened in late 1995. It had left the former Yugoslavia under particularly difficult circumstances, as net financial transfers from the former federal Government on the order of 5-7 per cent of GOP were being discontinued, foreign exchange reserves held in Belgrade were being lost. and exports were being hit hard by the dissolution of trade arrangements under the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance and by the imposition of United Nations sanctions on its principal export markets, Serbia and Montenegro. C Then, in March 1994, Greece imposed a unilateral trade blockade, which has since been lifted under a United Nations-sponsored Interim Accord between the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Greece (see document S/1995/794, annex I) in September 1995.
Output in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia has fallen steadily in the 1990s and is roughly half of its 1989 level. Industrial production declined by about 14 per cent in 1995, mainly in the mining, metal-processing, textiles and food-processing branches.
More than one third of the labour force are registered as unemployed. Inflation, however, peaked in 1992, at almost 1,700 per cent and was brought down to low double-digit levels under an internationally supported adjustment programme.
It is thus quite significant that output is forecast to begin to rise in 1996, albeit slowly.
The suspension of United Nations sanctions against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the improved relations with Greece will allow the re-establishment of economic ties.
However, substantial domestic and foreign investments are needed in order to lower the unemployment rate in the economy.
Although data are extremely sparse, the country most affected by the conflict is Bosnia and Herzegovina. Its economic situation remains a major concern. In addition to the general destruction and dislocations, the war caused very significant damage to the infrastructure and abrain drain.
The country had not embarked upon the transition before it was overwhelmed by the hostilities, and thus many institutions necessary for afunctioning market economy do not exist. Moreover, the success of any national economic policy will depend on healing the divisions between the communities to the extent that Bosnia and Herzegovina can function as an economic entity. There are substantial needs for reconstruction, mine clearance and development. 
Multilateral financial institutions, the United Nations and bilateral donors are expected to supply the bulk of the financial resources and technical assistance needed for reconstruction." For the short term, financial support must be on highly concessional terms, considering the limited debt-servicing capacity of the country. Over time, private direct investment and private financial flows can also be expected to play agrowing economic role.
gramme of Structural Reconstruction of the Ukrainian Economy.ls So far, however, Ukraine seems to be repeating the Russian Federation's 1992-1994 pattern of inconsistency in the implementation of economic reform, in particular in the policies designed to achieve financial stabilization - and with similar results, including persistent inflation, a serious budget deficit, balance-of-payments problems and painfully slow restructuring of enterprises.

Developing countries continued to experience relatively strong growth in 1995, with their aggregate CDP increasing by over 5 per cent. In many countries, investment and exports were the main sources of growth during the past year.
The aggregate growth rate, however, conceals sharp regional and national differences in economic performance. To a great extent, the high growth rate reflects the performance of South and East Asia and China, which currently originate about 50 per cent of the output of developing countries as a whole. As in recent years, China and South and East Asia registered very fast rates of growth, indeed the highest within the developing regions considered here (see table II.4).
With the exception of Latin America, CDP growth accelerated in other regions in 1995. After several years of declining per capita CDp, output growth in Africa was equal to population growth in 1995. Crowth also picked up in Western Asia, while a sharp deceleration in CDP growth in Latin America interrupted the recovery in per capita income that the region had been experiencing since 1991. Among other countries, Turkey rebounded from the sharp contraction of 1994, while the prospects in the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia are the best so far this decade, given the cessation of open hostilities (see box ILl).
The aggregate CDP growth rate is expected to increase to about 5);2 per cent in 1996 (see annex table A.4). At the same time, inflation will continue to decelerate, with the most significant improvements being made in Latin America and China. This marks a continuation of declining inflation in the developing countries since 1994 (see annex table A.13).
The average rate of increase in CDP in 1996 comprises distinct regional experiences in economic growth. On the one hand, the very rapid economic expansion in South and East Asia and China is moderating. On the other hand, economic recovery is expected to emerge in Latin America and significantly stronger economic growth is foreseen in Africa. For Africa, 1996 will mark the first increase in per capita income since the mid-1980s. With economic conditions improving in a large number of least developed countries in Africa, the average rate of growth of CDP in the least developed countries as a whole is forecast to reach 4 per cent in 1996.

Africa is experiencing the fastest economic growth since the start of this decade. Output grew 2.7 per cent which was about equal to the population growth rate in 1995. The improvement was rather broadly based, as about a dozen countries in Africa recorded CDP growth rates of 5 per cent or higher in 1995. In 1996, Africa is expected to see an increase in GDP per capita for the first time since 1985. Prospects have improved under favourable external conditions and ameliorated policy environments. Moreover, after droughts in 1995, good rainfall has generally returned to northern and southern Africa and a favourable agricultural season is predicted for 1996 throughout the continent with the exception of the countries affected by civil strife. Output growth is expected to slow in 1997, however, as demand from developed countries and some commodity prices weaken. The forecast is highly contingent on exogenous factors which can all turn out worse than expected, and thus highlights the vulnerability of the African recovery and the challenges to be overcome.Despite their overall growth performance, most Mrican countries are still among the poorest in the world: 33 out of the 48 least developed countries are African countries. The improved economic performance during the period 1995-1996 is so far only a short-term phenomenon and, unless it continues, will not be sufficient to significantly alleviate poverty, deteriorated social conditions and high unemployment rates accompanying what in some cases have been decades of economic decline or stagnation.

GDP growth was supported by higher prices and stronger demand in the international commodity markets (see chap. III), mainly from the developed market economies which absorb about two thirds of Africa's exports. Prices of metals and minerals rose faster than the prices of other commodities, providing an important stimulus to increased production in several mineral exporting countries.
Large increases in output of both food and cash crops occurred where normal weather predominated, thus boosting rural incomes. Preliminary data from the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) show that African coffee production increased by 10 per cent, cocoa production by 7.6 per cent, tea production by 7 per cent and cotton production by 4 per cent. In Malawi, for instance, the return of favourable weather conditions caused output to rise by 9.5 per cent in 1995, after it had contracted 12 per cent in 1994. In northern and southern Africa, however - in countries such as Morocco, South Africa, the United Republic of Tanzania and Zimbabwe - drought led to a contraction in agricultural output and sluggish growth in agriculture-dependent sectors (such as food processing). In all, total agricultural and food output remained unchanged in 1995 as a result of good crops in some countries being offset by poor harvests in others. African cereal production, however, declined by 13 per cent in 1995. With a number of countries having to cover weatherrelated shortfalls in food production - at a time when prices for food imports are high - commercial food imports for the 1995/96 marketing year is anticipated to have increased by 7 per cent to 35 million tons. Egypt and Morocco, for example, faced high trade deficits in 1995, in part because of the price increase of imported food.
Oil production increased by 2 per cent in Africa in 1995. With prices also firmer, this bolstered export revenues in the oil-exporting countries in 1995 by 10 per cent, compared with a decline in 1994. The improvement in oil exports contributed to a recovery in Cameroon, the Congo and the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, countries whose economies contracted in 1994. Nigerian GDP
grew by about 2 per cent in 1995. Economic activity in Nigeria has been hindered, inter alia, by deteriorating infrastructure and fuel scarcity owing to the poor conditions of the country's oil refineries.
Strong mineral and metal prices have stimulated mining production in Ghana and Zimbabwe, for example. However, the poor conditions in the mining sector in Zaire and Zambia limited the ability to take advantage of such factors in these countries. High diamond prices boosted export revenues of Namibia and Botswana, while in Zaire - notwithstanding the above-mentioned poor conditions - officially recorded diamond sales increased by over 20 per cent in real terms.
Non-traditional exports - such as horticultural products from Kenya and Malawi, manufactured goods from export-processing zones in Madagascar and Mauritius and motor vehicles from Botswana - also contributed to growth in these economies. Additionally, tourism revenues increased in 1995 in a number of countries, for example Egypt, Tunisia and Uganda. It contributed to growth in Ethiopia as more destinations became accessible to visitors as a result of the country's progress in the process of transition from civil war to peace. Senegal and the Comoros also witnessed growth in their tourism industry as a result of the devaluation of the CFA franc (see below) which increased these countries' attractiveness to tourists. Namibia, Madagascar and Zimbabwe also enjoyed strong growth in tourism during the year 1995.
The South African economy improved its economic performance in 1995.
GDP increased by 3.3 per cent (see table 11.4), with investment and exports being the most dynamic components of aggregate demand. The slow recovery in manufacturing employment since 1994 can do little to dent the unemployment rate, which remains alarmingly high (see chap. VIII). This notwithstanding, South Africa's increased trade and investment links with other southern African economies have contributed significantly to the growth performance of the latter. South's Africa trade with these countries had more than doubled since 1993 and direct investment by South African firms in Angola, Bostwana, Lesotho, Mozambique and Namibia, among others, increased dramatically during the same period. Market-oriented reforms in most of these countries, especially the privatization of State-owned enterprises, as well as South Africa's experience and familiarity with regional markets and cultures, improved investment opportunities in these countries and their attractiveness to South African investors.
Several events in 1995 demonstrated once again how vulnerable some African countries remain to the economic consequences of political troubles and instability. Social unrest, civil strife and political crises impeded economic activities in Burundi, Liberia, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, Somalia, the Sudan and Zaire. In Sierra Leone, for instance, rebel attacks caused a severe disruption of agriculture and a virtual cessation of mining, and GDP fell by an estimated 10 per cent in 1995. Policy uncertainty in Nigeria and Zaire remains a dominant factor in their poor economic performance in recent years.
On the other hand, peace agreements have raised economic prospects in Angola and Mozambique. However, the reconstruction of institutions and infrastructure, which suffered extensive damage during the conflicts, will take some time. Moreover, that reconciliation, resettling returnees and providing livelihoods for former combatants are a crucial facet of this process was underlined by the resumed fighting in Liberia in April 1996.

Stabilization and structural reforms 
Progress has been made in establishing macroeconomic stability in many African countries. As a result, consumer price inflation has exhibited a declining trend for the region as a whole and reached an estimated 22 per cent in 1995, compared with 24 per cent in 1994 (excluding Zaire).
In Algeria, the budget deficit has been reduced from about 9 per cent of GDP in 1993 to about 1 per cent in 1995 as a result of the reduction of food subsidies, other fiscal reforms and expenditure restructuring. The inflation remained relatively high at about 30 percent in 1995 owing to the cutback in subsidies and the depreciation of the currency.
Zaire managed to reduce consumer price inflation from 23,773 per cent in 1994 to 542 per cent in 1995. However, inflation resurfaced in Madagascar and remained high in Nigeria. In these countries, the inflation rate was at least 50 per cent in 1995. Ghana, which over several years maintained fiscal and monetary discipline'
has experienced some difficulties lately. Macroeconomic stability has deteriorated since 1992, when the civil servants received an 80 per cent increase in salary, which reversed the budget surpluses of the preceding years. The budget deficits and increases in money supply, coupled with exchange rate depreciation, and weather-related rises in food prices, have led to higher inflation. The Government sought to strengthen the fiscal situation with a new value-added tax (VAT), but riots against the tax and general economic conditions broke out in May 1995. The tax was subsequently withdrawn, but prices were not adjusted downward to pre-VAT levels. The poor implementation of the VAT and a fuel price increase were two additional factors in 1995 that pushed the inflation rate to about 55 per cent.
Structural reforms are progressing in many countries of the continent. In Egypt, to encourage investment, tariffs on imports of capital goods have been reduced, rent controls on new tenancy contracts for housing have been abolished and investment approval procedures have been simplified. Moreover, the new Government - which took office in January 1996 - released a list of several State-owned companies that it intends to privatize in 1996. The new impetus to the privatization programme is expected to soon lead to an agreement with IMF. This will clear the way for the last phase of a large debt relief package agreed with the Paris Club in 1991.

Economic performance has generally improved in the franc zone since the devaluation of the CFA franc in January 1994,17 The region has benefited from favourable external trade conditions which it was better able to take advantage of after devaluation, as well as a surge in official and private inflows of financial resources, which the devaluation triggered. 16 As in other parts of Africa, exports have been the driving force behind output growth. Stronger international demand compounded the positive impact of the devaluation of the CFA franc and provided solid incentives for increasing production. The GDP growth rate thus increased in nearly all countries within the zone. Several CFA countries registered GDP growth rates of as high as 5 per cent or more in 1995 (Benin, Burkina Faso, Chad, C6te d'Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea and Togo). Furthermore, investment and manufacturing production have picked up in some countries, particularly in those subsectors that focus on import-substitution and exports. Intrazonal trade expanded as producers from the zone became more competitive than outside suppliers.
Growth performance in the zone was, however, was also partly the outcome of some coinciding factors not related to the devaluation. For instance, new oilfields started production in C6te d'Ivoire and Equatorial Guinea and the sociopolitical situation improved in Chad and Togo.
With the devaluation, inflation at first erupted in the zone but was contained relatively quickly through tight fiscal and monetary policies, price controls, limiting of wage increases in the public sector and reduction of some tax rates.
Cumulative prices increase averaged about 50 per cent in the zone from December 1993 to September 1995, with Burkina Faso at the low end at 34 per cent and Benin, Chad and the Congo at the high end at about 60 per cent.
Inflation dropped during 1995 but still remained in the double digits in a few countries (Cameroon, Benin, Togo). Some further upward pressure on prices can be expected when the last price controls are relaxed.
The increase in consumer prices has negatively affected living standards, in urban areas in particular. To alleviate the impact of the devaluation on the most vulnerable groups, such as uneducated youth and the unemployed, several countries have initiated public works, and provided training, employment counselling and support for small enterprises. These measures have been partly supported by external finance.
There has been some progress in controlling public finances, as the aggregate budget deficit for the zone declined from 8.3 per cent of GDP in 1993 to 6.1 per cent in 1994. The expectation was that budget deficits would continue to decline in 1995 and 1996 when fiscal and civil service reforms proceeded.
Many countries have limited increases in civil servants' salaries and in government expenditure in general. Additionally, substantial debt relief has been granted to a number of countries by official bilateral creditors and this has assisted in containing government expenditures (see chap. III).
Several countries, however, had, as a reflection of financial constraints, accumulated arrears on their domestic payments. Salary arrears, for instance, increased substantially in the Congo and the Niger during 1994 and prompted strikes in both countries in 1994 and 1995. Domestic arrears were essentially eliminated at the end of 1995 in the western part of the franc zone (with the exception of the Niger). The problem persists, however, in the central part.
Reforms have gained momentum in 1995 in a number of countries in the franc zone. Reforms are focusing on privatization, the civil service, government expenditures and revenues, labour codes and agricultural marketing. Reforms addressing institutional and structural constraints are necessary conditions for taking full advantage of the CFA devaluation.
However, structural reforms have barely commenced and it is therefore too early to judge to what extent they will be able to change the production structure and raise the long-term growth potential of the economies. Or to paraphrase Louis M. Goreux:l1 Although the mechanical effects of the devaluation have been realized, there is no reason to feel complacent, because there will be no sustained growth without diversification and investment. Vigorous structural reforms are needed to maintain the current recovery.

The present upturn in economic performance demonstrates how sensitive Africa remains to external conditions. Policy reforms have contributed to improved economic performance in a number of countries, but .the impact on GDP has frequently been rather small and disappointing. 22 Despite the current economic upturn, economic performance remains impeded by long-term structural constraints to development, such as poorly developed institutions, poor infrastructure, a low level of development of human resources and unequal distribution of and access to resources, such as inputs and finance.
African countries continue to suffer from high external indebtedness.
Despite international cooperation in attempting to alleviate the external debt burden, the continent still experiences severe difficulties in servicing its debt.
Notwithstanding the stronger export performance of the region during 1995, debt indicators remain high. Indeed, in the sub-Saharan region excluding Nigeria and South Africa, the debt service-to-export ratio rose to almost 20 per cent in 1995, from 17 per cent in 1994. This ratio, moreover, does not include arrears which continued to build up in 1995. However, output growth led to a drop in the ratio of debt to gross national product (GNP) as this indicator fell from 136 per cent in 1994 to 121 per cent in 1995. (see table A. 37)
In March 1996, the United Nations launched a system-wide special initiative on Africa to ameliorate a number of these constraints. The United Nations System-Wide Special Initiative of Africa is the United Nations system's most significant mobilization of support ever for Africa as well as its largest coordinated action. The Special Initiative is to focus on such areas as basic education, basic health, water and sanitation. The total costs of the Special Initiative is estimated to be $25 billion over a 10-year period which will come mostly from the reallocation of existing resources at the national and the international level.

The year 1995 witnessed positive and negative developments in the Latin American region. Inflation fell to 25 per cent by year-end, a record low in the last 22 years and a major achievement for the region, given its not-so-successful attempts to control inflation in the past. Further slowing of inflation is expected during the current year. The financial crisis that assailed Mexico was contained through concerted international and domestic efforts and has not spread so as to become a major international or regional crisis. Nevertheless, its negative consequences were the interruption of the economic recovery that the region had been experiencing since 1991 and the reverberations that are still being felt by some economies in the region. The regional GDP increased by less than 1 per cent in 1995, well below population growth, and prospects for the current year are for a mild recovery; growth is not expected to exceed 2.5 per cent in 1996 (see table 11.4). The slow recovery underlines the possibility of increased social pressure in the region as unemployment has recently expanded or remained high in several countries.Moreover, recent economic developments exposed the fragility of the banking system in some countries, hence signalling a downside risk to the already modest economic performance forecast for the current year.

Most countries in the region continued to make progress in controlling inflation during 1995. In fact, inflation declined in 14 out of 18 countries monitored, and Argentina has now one of the world's lowest inflation rates.
Inflation increased somewhat in Bolivia, Costa Rica and EI Salvador reflecting fiscal imbalances. Costa Rica is a case in point: the public deficit reached 6.5 per cent of GDP in 1994, although by 1995 it had been brought down to 4.3 per cent. Mexico, on the other hand, was the only Latin American country that experienced a substantial acceleration of its inflation - from 7 per cent in 1994 to 52 per cent in 1995 - as a result of the devaluation of the peso and higher value-added taxes. It is anticipated that Mexican inflation will gradually fall, although it will remain relatively high at 30 per cent during the current year. It is expected that inflation will continue to decline in the region as countries continue to pursue policies aiming at reduced macroeconomic imbalances; much of the fiscal and monetary discipline exerted so far should therefore continue.The lower regional inflation rate in 1995 reflects the success of the Real Plan in Brazil, which heretofore had been an outlier to regional achievement on the inflation front (see figure II.2). The annual inflation rate fell from 930 per cent in 1994 to 22 per cent in 1995.
The Real Plan involved action on the fiscal and monetary levels. Measures leading to the de-indexation of the economy and the introduction of a new currency were taken in 1994 along with policies to restore equilibrium in the public sector accounts.The consolidated public sector closed the year 1994 with a surplus estimated at 1.2 per cent of GDP (operational concept). During 1995, however, the fiscal position could not be maintained owing to increases in personnel expenditures and interest payments on the domestic debt. Additional pressure on the fiscal accounts has also been brought about by the collapse of some of the country's largest banks, as discussed below. With the relaxation of fiscal discipline, much of the stabilization effort has been relying on the monetary and the exchange rate policy. The continuous decline in inflation demonstrates that this approach has been successful so far. This notwithstanding, the strategy may prove to be unsustainable in the long run, especially as high interest rates continue to attract foreign capital, thus intensifying the problem of excess liquidity in the economy, and discourage an expansion in demand, particularly investment, hence trapping the economy in a slow growth path. Reforms aiming at improved control over public expenditure - pension reform is one case in point - depend on congressional approval and the negotiations between the Government and the Congress have been progressing quite slowly.

The slow-down in the rate of growth of the aggregate regional GDP reflected economic recessions in Mexico and Argentina that had been triggered by the devaluation of the Mexican peso in December 1994 and the temporary reversal of capital inflows to the region.The Mexican economy contracted by 7 per cent, making the recession the worst in the recent history of the country. The Argentine GDP declined 4.4 per cent in 1995, thus interrupting that country's notable period of economic growth: its GDP had increased at an annual average rate of 7.5 per cent during the period 1991-1994. Open unemployment rose severely in both countries, reaching 18 per cent in Argentina - construction and manufacturing were the sectors hardest hit - and 6.5 per cent in Mexico, a record high for the country. Not included in these figures are the estimates for underemployment, which is believed to have soared, particularly in Mexico. The economic performance of these countries would have been much worse had it not been for substantial intensification of their export efforts and favourable international prices (see chap. III).
The Mexican financial crisis exposed the fragility of stabilization efforts based on the use of a fixed exchange rate as a "nominal anchor" when domestic inflation is higher than in major trading partners. It created an appreciating exchange rate which, within a context of trade liberalization, led to increasing trade deficits, financed with short-term foreign capital. Corrective measures were taken in several countries.
Tight monetary policies adopted in Brazil to contain the deterioration of the country's trade balance and prevent runs on the currency led to a sharp deceleration of output growth in that country in the second half of 1995, particularly in manufacturing. Annual GDP growth was reduced to about 4 per cent in 1995, down from 6 per cent in the previous year. Similar policies were adopted in Peru but, given the momentum from the very fast growth in 1994, Peru still produced the second fastest rate of GDP growth in the region in 1995.
Several other economies in the region were less affected by the volatility of short-term capital flows, either because they had not attracted them before in massive amounts and did not have extensive trade links with either Mexico or Argentina (as was the case for most of the Central American and Caribbean countries) or because they were not as vulnerable owing to the implementation of successful structural reforms (as was the case for Chile). In fact, Chile registered the fastest rate of growth in the region - 8.3 per cent - and was supported by increased· investment and extremely favourable terms of trade (see chap. VII). These countries could therefore follow their own course, thus registering moderate - albeit on the low side for a developing country - rates of growth of about 2-4 per cent (Paraguay, Bolivia, Panama, Costa Rica, Ecuador and Honduras, among others).
The banking crisis of 1994 (discussed below) is still being felt in Venezuela as public finances have deteriorated sharply and fiscal balance has not been restored. Pressure on its currency has mounted and exchange controls have been imposed. Economic stagnation still affected the non-oil sector of the economy. The economy grew by 2 per cent in 1995 In several of the Caribbean island economies, economic growth slowed down owing to a combination of adverse weather conditions which affected the tourism industry and agriculture (Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica), energy shortages which constrained manufacturing output, and austere fiscal and monetary policies to control inflation (Jamaica, Trinidad and Tobago). On the other hand, growth picked up in the Dominican Republic, and resumed in Cuba and Haiti.

Economic growth should increase in the region in 1996, as Mexico, Argentina and Uruguay slowly emerge from their recessions. These economies are not expected, however, to grow by more than 2 per cent in 1996. Moreover, several of the largest economies of the region - including Brazil, Chile, Colombia and Peru - are expected to have lower growth this year, while the other economies in Central and South America will, on average, repeat their 1995 growth performance.
The Caribbean countries are expected to record another year of sluggish growth in 1996.
Growth in Argentina is very much constrained by lack of demand. Household demand has declined in view of increased unemployment, lower real wages and uncertainty. Investment will not provide much boost to the cycle until firms' capacity utilization returns to pre-recession levels, likely not before the end of the year. The country's banking system is overcoming severe difficulties (see box II.2) and, although deposit levels were restored to pre-crisis levels, financial institutions are reluctant to extend credit. Moreover, the Government is committed to fiscal discipline, so it cannot be expected to provide much stimulus to growth. Recently, however, it has lowered taxes on mortgages, the sales of new houses and a few consumer products in order to give some boost to the economy. On the external front, prospects for growth are also uncertain. Though grain prices will remain firm during the year (see chap. III), exports to Brazil - Argentina's main export market - may not be as robust as last year's, as the Brazilian economy is growing more slowly and import demand is thus reduced. Mexico, on the other hand, has shown some signs of recovery, but incomes remain depressed in view of lower real wages and increased unemployment. Additionally, its banking system is still fragile In several Latin American countries, the banking systems have recently experienced severe difficulties that have impeded the resumption of faster economic growth. The most visible cases are Argentina and Mexico; but banking crises have also been occurring elsewhere in the region, including Bolivia, Brazil, Ecuador. Paraguay and Venezuela.
In some countries, the growth of credit needed for economic expansion is being limited by a banking industry that has suddenly become more hesitant to lend; meanwhile, public finances - in any case, stretched tight· - are being stressed by costly bailouts.
The external financial shocks of 1995 that were absorbed by Argentina and Mexico might have rocked even the most stable and conservative banking systems; but the banks of these countries, like those of many Latin American countries, were quite fragile institutions. The problem began with how the banks undertook their fundamental financial intermediation role.
Banks take deposits - both short-term "demand" deposits and medium-term time deposits - and borrow from other financial institutions and markets, and then they lend out the funds at higher interest rates than they themselves pay. The funds taken in by the Latin American banks have been unusually heavily weighted to short term, liquid deposit instruments, in part reflecting a less-than-solid confidence of depositors. The banks' portfolios of loans, however, tend to have a longer maturity and are usually guaranteed by collateral that cannot immediately be turned into cash. In this type of situation, prudence dictates an extremely conservative bank management and vigilant public supervision of the banking sector. If depositors begin a run on a bank - or all banks they can seriously deplete bank resources extremely quickly.
In this environment, there have been shortcomings on the part of both management and regulators. It has been argued that the legal framework in which Latin American banks operate is not fully developed and accounting standards are not adequate." Thus, for example, capital-to-asset ratios have not been effectively enforced where accounting practices were inadequate.
Bank lending practices in some countries have evidenced a poor management of risk, particularly over economic cycles. During periods of economic expansion, the volume of bank deposits typically grows and banks naturally lend out these funds. Some of the credits are based on inadequate risk assessments and optimistic expectations of future growth of the economy. When the economic cycle loses steam, borrowers have to cope with declining revenues and liquidity problems and the banks find themselves holding increasing stocks of "bad debt". .
At the same time, if depositors perceive the position of the banks to have weakened, they can trigger a liquidity crisis by fleeing the system, b The liquidity crisis can also arise without the solidity of the banks being at issue, at least at first, as when fear of an exchange rate devaluation leads to a sharp withdrawal of bank deposits for conversion into foreign exchange.
Argentina is acase in point. During the inflationary period preceding the introduction of the convertibility plan (1991), the demand for bank deposits in local currency was quite modest and the economy was characterized by a low level of monetization. Then, under the new monetary regime, the persistence of high real interest rates and the guaranteed exchange rate attracted short-term external capital and deposits increased, some of which were held in dollar accounts and some converted into pesos." When the December 1994 Mexican crisis arose, Argentine depositors panicked and Argentina's banking system lost about 18 per cent of its deposits during the first three months of 1995. Interest rates soared in order to keep resources in the system, but this compromised borrowers' ability to meet their debt obligations, and the banks had arush of bad loans.
Similar developmen k place in Mexico. The increase of capital inflows in the early 1990s was accompanied by asharp expansion in domestic credit supply to the private sector.d The small and weaker banks became aggressive lenders. Confidence in the future of the economy led these banks to expand credit at much faster rates than the larger banks, which actually became conservative in their credit policies." The appetite for credit was also fed by declining interest rates and optimistic expectations about the economy both by business and by households. Lack of strict supervision compounded the problem, as riskier banks were allowed to expand. When the Mexican crisis emerged, depositors started to run towards more solid institutions or away from the peso, interest rates skyrocketed and an over-indebted private sector s.tarted to default on its loans at a high rate.
Changes in the macroeconomic environment underlay some of the recent bank failures in Brazil. Brazilian banks had grown used to an inflationary environment in which demand deposits did not earn any remuneration and the banks could earn easy profits by using the cash from their deposits to purchase fully indexed government securities. With deregulation of the system in 1988 and the ending of restrictions on the establishment of financial institutions, the number of banks increased from 106 in 1988 to 207 in 1992.9 With the Real Plan, inflation was sharply reduced, but banks lost their lucrative business and the institutions that were not flexible enough had problems adjusting to the new environment, that is, acting like regular banks.
However, this explains only part of the Brazilian problem.The Government tightened monetary policy so as to restrain consumption in view of arapidly deteriorating trade balance and this pushed up interest rates. Many borrowers then became insolvent, further jeopardizing the banks' situation.
At the same time, several State-owed banks purchased considerable amounts of mostly unserviceable state and municipal bonds and in this way they acted as de facto money issuing centres.ln the process, the banks holdings of risky assets exceeded the limits of risk concentration. Although the Central Bank had closed some of the smaller of these institutions in the past, there has recently been considerable pressure to bail them out. Even Banco do Brasil, the largest Latin American bank, suffered huge losses and required a bailout as a result of non-performing loans that had been contracted by the agricultural sector and by some State-owned enterprises. .
Lax .supervision and poor regulation were behind the Venezuelan banking failures in 1994. The country's second largest bank in terms of deposits fell in 1994 owing to its very weak capital position and growing illiquidity. It was common practice to extend loans to its own shareholders on projects of questionable quality at "friendly" interest rates. The crisis quickly spread to other institutions as they began to be affected by withdrawal of deposits.
Monetary authorities had no choice but to act to prevent the collapse of the banking system in their respective countries. The strategy, broadly applied, was to infuse funds to bolster confidence. and force bank consolidations so as to make them more viable. Many banks have been liquidated or restructured through mergers and acquisitions, including through increasing participation of foreign banks as partial owners.
In the case of Argentina, the rules governing the fixed exchange regime meant that the Central Bank had limited capacity to act as a lender-of-Iast-resort to banks.However, Argentina did grant rediscounts to banks in 1995 and established a trust fund to support troubled banks, funded with resources of the multilateral financial institutions.
Nevertheless, many banks, particularly the small banks that had riskier portfolios, were closed. As a result, the number of banks operating in the economy declined from 200 by the end of 1994 to about 160 by December 1995 and further consolidation is expected.
Banking deposits have been restored to their pre-crisis level but, as of April 1996, this has yet to be paralleled by an expansion of bank credit.
In Mexico, a temporary capitalization programme (Programa de Capitalizacion Temporal (PROCAPTE)) was put in place to lend funds to undercapitalized banks so as to increase the ratio of capital to loans in their portfolio. A programme to deal with the restructuring of overdue loans was also launched (Fonda Bancario de Proteccion al Ahorro (FOBAPROA)) that aimed at inducing banks to increase their capital and sell their bad debts. Additionally, a programme to cut interest cost on consumers' and small enterprises'
loans was devised (Acuerdo de Apoyo Inmediato aDeudores (ADE)). Costs of all these programmes have been estimated at about 5 per cent of Mexican GOP. Financing will come from issuing public debt in the domestic market. The total cost may exceed the revenues to the Government earlier in the decade from privatizing the banks.
In Brazil, a programme to support mergers and acquisitions with fiscal incentives and credit subsidies has been launched (Programa de Estfmulo a Restrutura930 do Sistema Financeiro Nacional (PROER)). capital adequacy requirements were increased, and a deposit insurance mechanism was introduced. The Venezuelan bailout has been the most costly so far. In order to avoid a generalized run on the banking system, the Central Bank, through the Deposit Insurance Fund (Fonda de Guarantfa de Depositos (FOGAOE))h injected a considerable amount of financial aid - albeit without proper supervision - into the system; but then FOGADE began to run out of resources (the unsuccessful bailout had cost an estimated 11 per cent of GOP) and no advances in recapitalizing the banks were made. The Government ended up having to bring the banks under its control.
despite government efforts to support the industry, as discussed below. Moreover, as interest rates have remained high and the economy has not yet taken off, additional Mexican enterprises may become insolvent, thus compromising any faster economic recovery.
Growth is expected to slow down among the other large economies of the region. In Brazil, despite some relaxation of monetary policy by the end of 1995, credit conditions remain tight and real interest rates are still high, thus discouraging consumption and investment. Further monetary loosening depends on progress in controlling the fiscal deficit.
The Peruvian growth rate is also expected to decelerate as austere fiscal and monetary measures are adopted owing to the need to correct a growing external imbalance.Additionally, the Government will not be able to provide much stimulus as fiscal revenues decline as a result of reduced economic activity and privatization proceeds decline.
Colombia's economic performance is also expected to deteriorate this year as business confidence is being negatively affected by the political crisis.
Much of past year's growth was brought about by increased investment (particularly in the oil sector) and expansionary fiscal policy which will gradually subside this year. The Chilean economy will gradually slow down in 1996 and 1997 as a result of less favourable prices for its major exports and some tightening in its monetary policy. Nevertheless, Chile will still grow strongly in 1996, at 6 per cent.
In a departure from previous interventionist policies, Venezuela is undergoing a new structural adjustment programme aimed at stabilizing the economy.
The programme entails the abolition of all existing foreign-exchange controls, the liberalization of interest rates, a fivefold rise in gasoline prices and an increase in the wholesale tax. The Government plans to cut this year's deficit from 7 to 2 per cent of GDP and to eliminate the deficit altogether next year.
Despite strong institutional support for the programme, the inevitable devaluation (following a 41 per cent devaluation in December 1995) is likely to cause a sharp inflationary upturn, aggravating social unrest. An increase in social spending equivalent to 3 per cent of GDP was announced to limit the social cost of the adjustment. The programme is supported by a financial package from multilateral institutions including a US$ 1.4 billion standby credit from IMF. The non-oil sector is forecast to contract by 4 per cent in 1996. Such a dismal performance will be partially offset by the oil sector, which is expected to grow by 6 per cent and thus contribute to reducing the overall decline of the 1 economy to about 1 /2 per cent.

Economic growth in West Asia so recovered as to reach 3.1 per cent in 1995, following a year of near stagnation in 1994 (table 11.4). Oil-importing economies expanded at 6.4 per cent while the oil-exporting economies grew 2.6 per cent. Higher oil prices and export revenues boosted economic recovery in most oil-exporting countries; but efforts to implement economic reforms and reduce budget deficits, while reducing fiscal imbalances, restrained growth in most of these countries. Growth in the output of the oil-exporters has thus failed, for a third consecutive year, to keep pace with their rapidly growing populations. In the oil-importing countries, strong growth in private investment and consumption helped boost economic recovery. The progress being made towards peace in the Middle East stimulated growth of new investment, tourism and construction, particularly in Israel, Jordan and Lebanon.
Developments in the oil market and the peace process will continue to dominate the region's economy in 1996. Economic activity is expected to expand by about 3 per cent as the effects of the recent rise in oil prices and private investment filter through local economies. However, this forecast is contingent on maintaining the 1995 levels of oil production and prices, continuation of economic reforms, and progress in the peace process. Fiscal reform in oilexporting countries, mainly associated with reductions in government expenditure, is expected to subdue economic growth in the near term, with economic in growth unchanged at 2 per cent in 1996. This and the general opening of economies to private investment are expected to enhance the contribution of private economic activity to output growth.
Economic growth in Saudi Arabia recovered in 1995 with GDP expanding by 1.7 per cent, following a contraction of more than 2 per cent in the previous year. Fiscal consolidation, in effect since 1994, will continue to restrain economic growth, which is expected to remain at the same level in 1996 as in 1995. In the Islamic Republic of Iran, economic activity rose by 3 per cent in 1995. It had recovered in spite of large cuts in government spending. Economic reforms, which had been launched six years ago, continued to have a positive impact on the country's balance of payments, leading to a sharp increase in the current account surplus for the third consecutive year. Controlling imports will remain a priority over the next few years as the government continues to generate the current account surpluses needed to finance its debt-servicing obligations.
In the United Arab Emirates, output expanded by only 1.3 per cent in 1995 owing to the effects of restrained oil production and falling oil revenues over the past few years, while the still small non-oil sectors of the economy expanded rapidly. Economic growth in Kuwait slowed to 3 per cent in 1995 and is expected to slow further in 1996 as the contraction of government expenditures is continued in order to reduce the large budget deficit created by expenditures during the Persian Gulf conflict. The Government plans to reduce subsidies on petroleum products and services such as water and electricity, increase customs levies and introduce telephone charges for domestic calls, which were previously free.
Against a background of an inflation rate of over 100 per cent, GDP growth in Yemen was barely positive in 1995, reflecting increased petroleum activity.
The economy is expected to improve over the next few years as a result of financial assistance to support structural reforms and economic stabilization.
In the Syrian Arab Republic, economic expansion, helped by economic reforms and boosted by increasing oil production, is expected to remain strong, with GDP rising by about 5 per cent in 1996.
In the oil-importing countries, economic activity, stimulated by private investments and helped by the prospects of peace, is expected to remain buoyant with GDP growing at 4 per cent in 1996. Private investment has responded to reduced political uncertainties, and foreign investment in these countries has also increased significantly, helping to finance reconstruction, production and infrastructure projects. Continuation of the peace process is expected to mitigate major impediments to the region's economic growth and prosperity, most notably, by allowing the possibility of reducing the large defence budgets and the risks and uncertainties that have traditionally discouraged investment and inhibited regional economic integration in trade, energy and tourism.
The economy of Israel grew about 7 per cent and unemployment dropped to a low level of 6 per cent in 1995. This strong performance continued to be driven primarily by private sector growth. The high growth in domestic demand resulted in a considerable increase in the trade deficit and the current account deficit rose to more than $4 billion, or 5 per cent of GDP. Policies instituted to correct this imbalance are expected to temporarily slow economic growth to 4 per cent in 1996. Economic activity in Jordan expanded at 6.3 per cent and is expected to improve further in 1996 because of sound fiscal and monetary policies. Jordan also began to benefit from its peace treaty with Israel, with tourism arrivals rising and tourism-related construction and private investment surging. Debt cancellation and debt rescheduling also reduced the country's debt-servicing burden. In Lebanon, economic recovery, driven mainly by the rehabilitation and reconstruction of the country's infrastructure, continued to be strong for the third consecutive year, with GDP rising at 7.0 per cent in 1995. Like Israel and Jordan, Lebanon experienced renewed interest from foreign investors, with direct investment flows amounting to $35 million in 1995.
A pause in growth momentum is now expected in 1996, as a consequence of the recent conflict in the southern part of the country, but the momentum will resume over the next few years as a large number of reconstruction projects are be launched.
All in all, economic activity in the region continues to suffer from the lingering consequences of the Persian Gulf conflict, particularly in Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait and Yemen. The United Nations sanctions against Iraq, in effect since August 1990, continue to cripple the country's economic and social development and curtail trade and interregional flows of capital investment.
High rates of unemployment also continue to be problematic in many countries, particularly Yemen and the West Bank and Gaza Strip, where 30 per cent of the workforce is unemployed. Unemployment is also beginning to affect nationals of the member countries of the Gulf Cooperation CounciFB (GCC).
This is quite unusual, as these countries have traditionally been destinations of an expatriate labour force used to supplement short supplies of domestic labour. It is estimated that expatriate labour represents an average of 60 per cent of the total labour force in those countries.Government policies have aimed at replacing expatriates by nationals, but such policies have proved difficult to implement.
Several oil-exporting countries, including the Islamic Republic of Iran, Kuwait, Oman, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, initiated reform programmes involving measures to reduce budget deficits, restructure the public sector, and promote private sector participation. As a result, government subsidies of public utilities and health services were reduced slightly and fees have been charged or raised for a number of government services in some of these countries. Nevertheless, with still large budget deficits,30 there remains a clear need for a sustained policy to further rationalize spending, reform public enterprises, reduce subsidies. and raise non-oil revenues.
Despite some efforts directed at reducing the dominant role of oil in the economy, the production structures of most of the countries in the region remain largely undiversified. This is particularly pronounced in the case of the oil-exporters, where oil provides over 80 per cent of government revenues and accounts for close to 50 per cent of GDP. Because of this high dependence on oil, their economies remain highly vulnerable to the fluctuations in oil prices, which affect not only the oil-exporting countries, but also the oil-importing countries through employment opportunities for expatriate workers, workers'
remittances and trade in goods and services.

Economic growth in South and East Asia is expected to moderate slightly to 6 per cent in 1996 from 7 per cent in 1995. This reversal in the trend of accelerating growth since 1992 is largely the result of a deceleration in economic expansion in most of the high-growth countries - the Republic of Korea, Singapore, Indonesia, Malaysia and Thailand. Among the other economies in the region, Hong Kong and Taiwan Province of China are expected to maintain their 1995 rates of growth of 5-6 per cent in 1996. The positive trend in economic growth of the last several years in the Philippines, Viet Nam and India is expected to continue. Here, as well as in the high-growth economies, the policy objective is to restrain inflation while maintaining or strengthening the rate of economic growth. In Pakistan, Bangladesh and Sri Lanka, economic growth in 1996 is likely to be restrained by political instability which has deteriorated since last year.
The expected deceleration of economic growth in the high-growth economies is the result of tightening monetary policies implemented last year.
GDP growth rates will be reduced from a range of 8-10 per cent in 1995 to 7-8 per cent in 1996. After several years of continued high growth, demand began to push against productive and infrastructure capacity constraints, resulting in increasing upward price pressure. The change in policy stance in 1995 was directed at slowing economic expansion to a more sustainable rate, with lower inflation and reduced current account deficits.
Investment, which has been an important impetus for economic growth, has begun to slow in response to more restrictive monetary conditions in Malaysia and Thailand. The investment boom in the Republic of Korea in the last two years is also subsiding. However, the burden of restraint in credit creation in the Republic of Korea has fallen disproportionately on small and mediumsized enterprises, which have less access to, and pay more for, financing than the conglomerates. Investment in Singapore is expected to be less buoyant as well, as the strong currency and rising manufacturing costs make investment in domestic labour-intensive industries less attractive than investment in similar industries in neighbouring Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN)
countries. The exception is Indonesia, where monetary policy has not restrained domestic investment and very strong foreign direct investment has boosted total investment. Higher interest rates and curbs on consumer credit growth have restrained private consumption growth in many of these economies as well.
The expansion of exports, which benefited from the appreciation of the yen, was particularly robust in the high-growth economies (except Singapore) in 1995. A significantly lower rate of growth of exports is expected in 1996 because of exchange rate realignments due to the yen depreciation. This effect is expected to be accentuated in the Republic of Korea because its currency is expected to appreciate against the dollar. Growth in export value in Singapore slowed in 1995 from exceptionally high rates in 1994 because of the declining price of electronics, its major export. This trend in export growth in the highgrowth economies is expected to continue in 1996, as the weakening of demand from the developed market economies is going to further dampen demand for overall exports. As a result of tight· monetary policy, inflation is expected to moderate, to about 5 per cent or lower, in most of the high-growth countries in 1996. The monetary policy stance is expected to remain contractionary this year but the recent resurgence in short-term capital inflows in some countries - Thailand and Indonesia - has expanded liquidity and could undermine the effectiveness of monetary policy. In response, these countries have instituted sterilization measures and temporary controls, such as increased reserve requirements on foreign deposits, to stem the inflow, as they have been reluctant to allow their currencies to appreciate significantly. However, continued inflows at the current pace could reduce the efficacy of these measures, pushing policy makers to allow currency appreciation.
Current account deficits have been rising rapidly in the high-growth economies (except Singapore). The deficits in Malaysia and Thailand (9 per cent and 7.5 per cent of GDP, respectively, in 1995) were particularly large but were adequately financed by capital inflows. However, the structure of capital inflow in Thailand has become potentially more volatile as the short-term debt component has grown rapidly. The resource gap is expected to be reduced only somewhat in 1996 with slower economic expansion. Progress in Malaysia has been promising, with the recent substantial slow-down in industrial growth and car sales, both major sources of demand for imported capital goods and parts.
Thailand's adjustment is expected to be slower, although investment growth has slowed significantly. The current account deficit of Indonesia (3.5 per cent of GDP) is expected to continue to widen, with continued high import growth generated by continued strong investment as well as recent trade liberalization.
The external imbalance of th~ Republic of Korea, which deteriorated substantially in 1995, is expected to improve with the slowing of domestic demand.
Because of its heavy reliance on imported capital goods from Japan, the improvement in the Republic of Korea's terms of trade from the appreciation of its currency against the yen will also be an important factor.
The economies of Hong Kong and Taiwan Province of China, which have been expanding at relatively moderate rates of 5-6 per cent since the early 1990s, are expected to maintain these rates of growth in 1996. Their ongoing transition from manufacturing to service economies and the political uncertainties surrounding the return of the sovereignty of Hong Kong to China in 1997 are major factors restricting growth to these levels. Lower property prices and political uncertainties are expected to continue to depress consumer and business confidence in Hong Kong. This negative effect will be offset to an extent by continued high levels of infrastructure investment. In Taiwan Province of China, the easing of tensions with China after the recent presidential elections is expected to improve private consumption and business confidence later this year and offset the decline in the first quarter. Furthermore, export growth of both economies will moderate this year because of continued economic slowing in 'China and, as with most of the region, depreciation of the yen and weakening of demand from developed market economies.
In contrast with the deceleration of economic growth in the high-growth countries, growth in the Philippines is expected to accelerate; moreover, Viet Nam will be able to maintain its high rate of growth and India will sustain its current rate of economic expansion. These economies are benefiting from improved macroeconomic stability and the results of economic reforms implemented since the end of the 1980s and early 1990s. Economic reforms are expected to continue, although with some adjustment in pace and priority compared with earlier years. The major macroeconomic challenge will be restraining inflation while maintaining or strengthening economic growth.
Economic growth in the Philippines will continue to accelerate in 1996 to 6 per cent. Strong expansion of exports and investment will remain the primary stimuli to growth. The competitive exchange rate and continued liberalization in trade and foreign direct investment have been important factors in the dynamism of exports and direct investment inflows. Manufacturing growth is expected to remain strong and has been facilitated by the success of government policies in improving the power supply situation. Recovery of agriculture from last year's natural disasters will also boost production.
Price increases moderated in the latter part of 1995 with the average rate of inflation for the year declining to just over 8 per cent from 9 per cent.
Prospects for continued decline in inflation are uncertain because of the effect of large capital inflows on the expansion of credit. As noted above for Thailand and Indonesia, currency appreciation is the least preferred option for dealing with these capital inflows. In addition, continued reduction of the fiscal deficit in the Philippines is dependent on the implementation of politically unpopular fiscal reform measures, namely, the further reduction of oil price subsidies and the institution of comprehensive tax reform. There is also the one-time effect on prices of the extension of the VAT at the beginning of the year.
Economic growth in Viet Nam is expected to remain at approximately 9.5 per cent in 1996, but at the cost of deteriorating internal and external imbalance.
Strong growth in public and private investment is a major stimulus to the economy. Private and official capital inflows have become an important source of financing. Foreign direct investment, primarily from Japan and the Asian newly industrialized economies (the Republic of Korea, Hong Kong, Singapore and Taiwan Province of China) has increased significantly in the last two years.
Exports will remain buoyant, with continued strong growth of agricultural exports and gradual diversification into manufactured exports. Import growth due to the strength of investment and consumption and trade liberalization will be even higher, resulting in a larger current account deficit. On the supply side, agricultural output growth is expected to remain strong, barring any natural disasters.
Control of the budget deficit (5.5 per cent of GDP in 1995) will remain a challenge because of difficulties in increasing government revenues through tax reform and a pressing need for development/infrastructure projects. Money supply growth is expected to continue at a high rate, owing to continuing credit creation to finance the state enterprise sector and the inflow of funds. Inflation in 1996 is therefore expected to worsen from about 13 per cent in 1995.
GDP growth in India is expected to be just over 6 per cent in 1996, continuing the pace in 1995. Here too, the major impetus to growth is expected to be investment and exports, as the currency depreciation in late 1995 will maintain export growth at high levels. Investment is also expected to remain strong in response to strong final demand and a more accommodative monetary policy in 1996. Growth in agricultural output and food prices are expected to be stable pending favourable weather conditions. Inflation moderated during 1995 because of the decline in food prices due to increased supplies. Because of the still high budget deficit (almost 6 per cent of GDP), control of inflation in 1995 depended on a tightening of monetary policy, which restrained the growth of private investment.
Economic liberalization and reform since 1991 have contributed importantly to India's robust economic growth in the last two years. To date, most progress has been made in the reform of private investment regulation, the liberalization of exports and imports of intermediate goods, convertibility in the current account and the beginning of reform in the financial sector. The nature and pace of the next wave of reform await the results of the April 1996 elections.
The rates of growth of other South Asian countries -Bangladesh, Pakistan and Sri Lanka - are expected to remain almost unchanged in 1996, in the range of 5-6 per cent, with little improvement in, and even some deterioration of, their domestic and external imbalances. The recent intensification of political conflicts and widespread strikes in Bangladesh and continued sectarian violence and labour unrest in Pakistan can be expected to hold down economic growth because of the resulting disruption of different sectors of the economy.
Worsening ethnic strife in Sri Lanka has undermined investor confidence and put a halt to foreign direct investment, damaging prospects for strengthening economic growth in the near term. The difficulty of implementing fiscal reform in an environment of political instability and the pressure to increase military expenditures as a result of internal strife - in the case of Sri Lanka - have kept the budget deficits of these countries above 6 per cent of GDP.
China: conslolidatioln of macroeconomic stabilization During 1995, China maintained a contractionary policy stance and its economic growth rate slowed to 10 per cent, while inflation slowed also. Reducing inflation was a priority: to achieve this goal, the Government continued its relatively tight monetary policy, while financing its fiscal deficits by bond issues.
The growth of fixed investment decelerated from over 30 per cent in 1994 to about 19 per cent in 1995. The rise in retail sales slowed to about 10 per cent in real terms over 1994. As a result, the rate of inflation was reduced to about 17 per cent from 24 per cent in 1994.
The reduction in the rate of inflation was the result of several factors.
Macroeconomic policy, as already noted, was one such factor. A record year in grain production helped to contain the rise in food prices, which had been an important factor in overall inflation in recent years. Moreover, the Government took specific measures to curtail price increases. This included liberalization in the wholesale and retail sectors which promoted competition. Also, the central Government used its foreign-exchange reserves to import goods in short supply and restrain price increases in the domestic market. Local Governments adjusted their food stocks to support price stability. Price increases for goods and services still under government price control were postponed. Other measures such as official price inspections were also employed to discourage price increases.
Losses of State-owned enterprises (SOEs) increased as their financial difficulties intensified in a restrictive macroeconomic environment. As a tight monetary policy restrained the amount of credit available to enterprises, the problem of "chain debts" (the term refers to a situation where enterprises are indebted to one another for supplies of materials and intermediate inputs)
worsened. Indeed, the problems that the SOE sector posed to overall economic efficiency and to the central Government's budget remained unresolved. Recognizing the crucial role of state enterprise reforms at this juncture of China's economic development, the Government identified the area as a priority in future reforms.
Controlling inflation will also remain a policy priority for 1996 and the Government intends to continue its tight monetary stance as well as to employ more direct means of restraining the growth of fixed investment (for an analysis of China's investment policy, see chap. VII). That priority will be given to financing investment in agriculture and infrastructure would help relax bottlenecks in the economy and thus reduce inflationary pressures. As a result, further moderation in economic growth and the rate of inflation can be expected this year.
The Government has set the target GDP growth rate at 8 per cent and inflation at 10 per cent for 1996. Based on economic data on the first two months of 1996 and an assessment of the policy environment in terms of the response to mounting pressure for increased credit to many SOEs, GDP growth could approach 9 per cent this year, as there may be some monetary loosening later in the year as inflation continues to moderate.
Declining domestic inflation, a relatively tight monetary policy and significant inflows of foreign exchange resulted in a mild appreciation of the domestic currency during 1995. If continued, currency appreciation could dampen the competitiveness of China's exports in 1996. In addition, trade liberalization measures combined with a less contractionary macroeconomic policy can be expected to stimulate the demand for imports. As a result, the trade surplus may narrow somewhat in 1996, although this would follow the much expanded trade surplus of 1995, which reached almost $17 billion. China's foreignexchange reserves increased by $22 billion during 1995, with total reserves reaching $74 billion by the end of the year.
For the near future, the transition from input-driven economic growth to growth based on efficiency improvement has been identified by the Government as the overarching goal. Economic reforms will be implemented to facilitate this transformation. Financial sector reforms to strengthen the development of financial institutions and prudential supervision as well as trade liberalization will be carried out. At the same time, reforms aimed at establishing a system of social security, unemployment insurance and medical insurance will continue in order to cushion the social impact of the eventual reform of state enterprises. Thus, barring major political changes, the Chinese economy can be expected in 1997 to maintain its relatively high rate of growth whilecontinuing to restrain the rate of inflation.
The international economy in the mid-1990s contains several encouraging features and presents at least one major difficulty. On the positive side, world trade in 1996 is in its third consecutive year of unusually strong growth. The prices of many commodities exported by developing countries have remained strong. The World Trade Organization, the new international organization established to oversee the operation of the international trading system and handle disputes and in which virtually all the world's nations wish to participate, is now a year. old. International financial flows continue to spread rapidly around the globe and foreign direct investment (FDI) is reaching new highs. Immediately after the shock of the Mexican balance-of-payments crisis, Mexico took strong adjustment steps, which the international community supported fmancially, that facilitated Mexico's return after only a few months to the international financial markets. In addition, the international community formulated a strategy to prevent future emergencies, while setting up special fmaricing as a fall-back. Moreover, substantial progress fmally seems to be on the near horizon as regards addressing the severe debt difficulties ofa number of lowincome countries in a more comprehensive manner.
The most worrisome feature of the international situation, however, is the fact that recent trends and future prospects are Meal.: for marshalling the concessional international fmancial resources that are needed in many countries for economically and socially important projects yet are not usually provided on a commercial basis. These are the resources for official development assistance (ODA), that is, for financial and technical cooperation with the poorest countries and the poorest people.

The total value of world merchandise trade was about $5 trillion in 1995.
Developed countries supplied almost two thirds of world exports, selling more than 70 per cent to other developed countries. Developing countries provided about 29 per cent of the world total, almost half of which originated in South and East Asia (excluding China). Economies in transition accounted for the remainder of world exports, about 4 per cent of the total (see annex table A.15).
This is a snapshot of world trade, but it should be borne in mind that trade is also very dynamic. Only five years earlier (when international petroleum prices were at a temporary peak), the total value of world trade was less than $3.5 trillion and the developed countries accounted for over 70 per cent of it.
Five years hence, world trade will again be a far larger magnitude and the proportions of different countries and country groups in total trading activity will have again evolved appreciably.

In the first three years of the 1990s, the volume of world exports grew 3.5 per cent a year on average. World export volume then grew by over 10 per cent in 1994, and by almost 9 per cent in 1995, and it is forecast to grow 7% per cent this year (see annex table A.19). The main reason for the change is that imports of the largest buyers, the developed economies, grew slowly in the early 1990s, but they have been growing rapidly since.
The volume of imports of developed economies grew relatively slowly in the first three years of the decade and then speeded up in the period 1994-1996 for several reasons. The first is that 1991 was a recession year for Australia, Canada, New Zealand and the United States of America, while 1991 and 1992 were recession years for the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and 1991, 1992 and 1993 were recession years for Finland, Sweden and Switzerland. Japan and much of continental Western Europe entered into recession in 1993. From 1994 on, all the developedcountries were in various stages of economic recovery and this raised the demand for imports. However, the slow-down in economic growth during 1995 and continuing into 1996, especially in Europe, as discussed in chapter II, slowed the growth of import demand and is a major factor behind the slower growth of import volume forecast for 1996.
An exception to this story is the case of Japan. The recovery in Japan has been particularly weak, but its import volume rose 13.6 per cent in 1994 and then by over 10 per cent in 1995. A prime reason was the sharp appreciation of the yen, as may be seen in figure IlL!. By 1995, the inflation-adjusted purchasing power of the yen had risen more than 25 per cent above the 1990 level, making imports very attractive to Japanese residents.
Exchange-rate changes have been significant in other countries as well. In Italy, for example, the real effective exchange rate ofthe lira in 1993 was about 14 per cent lower than in 1992, reflecting the depreciation of the lira after Italy left the exchange-rate mechanism of the European Monetary System in the fall of 1992. This loss in foreign purchasing power seems to have aggravated the effect of the recession in Italy in that year: the volume of imports contracted by II per cent in 1993. Exports, however, began to surge, stimulated by the exchange-rate effect. They rose 8 per cent in 1993, almost 12 per cent in 1994 and 15 per cent in 1995. Similar factors were at work in the United Kingdom and several smaller European economies.
Additional factors have of course also been at work. In Canada and the United States, for example, the strong role of investment in their recoveries from recession - and in particular the growth of machinery and equipment investment - found a counterpart in their import figures. Thus, while world imports of machinery and equipment (other than passenger road vehicles and parts) grew by one eighth from 1992 to 1994, Canada's imports of these items grew 20 per cent and those of the United States grew 26 per cent.1 In addition, one of the factors in the growth of imports in Japan has been the technological advances in new computers exported by the United States, which have the power to easily run the graphics-based software used in Japanese language programmes. In fact, the volume of imports of machinery and equipment, including computers and semiconductors, rose 36 per cent in 1995. Also, the value of semiconductor imports alone rose 54 per cent (these had been the object of bilateral negotiations between Japan and the United States).
The major export markets of the developed countries are other developed countries and the growth of their exports has risen with the growth of their imports. Thus, Western Europe's export volume grew 11 per cent in 1994, the first year of economic recovery, and over 7 per cent in 1995; but they are forecast to grow only 5 per cent in 1996, owing to the economic slow-down in Europe discussed earlier.
The main exception with respect to the recent export growth buoyancy has been Japan, where as a consequence of the yen appreciation noted above, the volume of exports grew less than 2 per cent in 1994 and 6 per cent in 1995.
Export volume is forecast to increase only 21 per cent in 1996.
The over-8 per cent-a-year export volume growth of the United States in 1994 and 1995 and forecast for 1996 reflects both the flip side of the Japanese import expansion noted above and increased United States sales to developing countries. Indeed, this is a broader phenomenon. Developed countries have been increasingly selling to developing countries, as well they would be since the markets of the latter have been growing so rapidly. Developing economies now purchase about 25 per cent of developed-country exports, up from 20 per cent in 1990.

The volume of developing-country imports has grown by over 9 per cent a year or more since 1991 and it is forecast to rise by 121 per cent in 1996 (annex table A.19). This is, as usual, the result of a broad mix of outcomes.
The growth of Latin America's import volume was dramatically curtailed in 1995 by the financial crisis in two of its three largest economies, while the continuing adjustment programmes in the large West Asian economies once again reduced their import levels. Other Asian economies thus accounted for most of the growth of imports in 1995, although Africa also participated in import volume growth, if in a modest way.
Except in South Africa, the volume of Africa's imports rose only slightly in 1995, although a stronger growth is forecast for 1996 (see annex table A.19).
South African imports grew rapidly, fuelled by the country's investment boom (see chap. VIII). While Africa's average import increase was not large by global standards, it was fairly widespread. Imports were stimulated by trade liberalization policies and by expanded food imports owing to drought conditions in northern and southern Africa. The rise in imports was made possible in part by higher commodity export earnings, owing to stronger prices in 1994 and 1995 and the encouragement that this gave to expanding export volumes - abetted, for the countries of the franc zone, by the salutary effects of the devaluation of the CFA franc in early 1994 (see chap. II). Export volumes were thus boosted by almost 5 per cent in 1995 and double that increase is forecast for 1996.
Import growth has been consistently strong in South and East Asia and in most years in China. This is paralleled - and made possible - by the rapid growth of exports. Economies in this region have been particularly successful in expanding into the most dynamic sectors of merchandise trade - into the "new" manufactured products, the highly sophisticated "information-age"
goods.3 They have also spread more traditional manufacturing export capacities around the region (see box IILI for a case in point).
The Asian region, moreover, has become a significant market for its own products, reflecting its increasing economic integration, much of it fostered by intraregional FDL The main pattern has been for investment to flow from Japan and the newly industrialized economies - the Republic of Korea, Hong Kong, Singapore and Taiwan Province of China - to Indonesia, Malaysia and Thailand.
This, in turn, has generated a demand in the host countries for imported capital goods and other inputs.
More recently, there has been an extension of such regional economic integration to the Philippines and Viet Nam. This has been in response to the significant progress in overall economic reform, particularly the liberalization of FDI regulations, as well as substantially stabilized macroeconomic conditions.
Viet Nam is a special case in which the transition to a market-oriented economy has opened up new opportunities for investment as well as a potentially large domestic market.
China is also a major destination for FDI, the gross inflow reaching $38 billion in 1995. Indeed, with strong growth of the volume of exports - estimated at 17 per cent in 1995 (annex table A.19) - and substantial capital inflows, the exchange rate began to appreciate. If continued, currency appreciation could dampen the competitiveness of China's exports in 1996.4 The trade situation in Latin America reflected the dramatic events occurring there in 1994 and 1995, mainly in the three largest economies (which together account for about 60 per cent of the region's trade). While Latin American exports grew very strongly in 1995, import growth was sharply curtailed.
The latter mainly reflected the sharp adjustments in Argentina and Mexico, as deficits in the balance of payments on current account which many observers had privately feared could not be sustained suddenly became unsustainable in fact in late 1994 and 1995 when the requisite financing disappeared.
In 1996, with moderate recovery forecast for Argentina and Mexico, regional import volumes are expected to resume a stronger rate of growth.
In Brazil, the largest economy in the region, import growth was encouraged by a liberalization policy, as part of the anti-inflation programme. Dramatic progress was indeed made in reducing inflation and this boosted confidence and helped to attract large capital inflows that underwrote strong domestic demand and thus the import growth. However, the financial inflows were so large that a substantial build-up of foreign exchange reserves was required to limit the appreciation of the currency.
In the case of Mexico, the exchange-rate peg had to be abandoned before the end of 1994.5 For 1995, the annual real effective exchange rate of the Mexican peso was 30 per cent below its 1994 level, leaving it almost 20 per cent below the level in 1991 when the latest bout of overvaluation had begun (see Over some 15 years, exports of ready-made garments rose from insignificance to constitute over half the exports of Bangladesh (see figure).- It is an industry that employs a relatively standardized technology (based essentially on sewing machines) with no major economies of scale. Yet it was an industry that at first did not "take off" in Bangladesh. In this case, national policy changes provided an enabling condition and international policy created an incentive for producers in other countries to look to Bangladesh. That policy involved the quota limits on exports of individual developing countries under the Multi-Fibre Arrangement (MFA). The operation of the MFA created a strong incentive to producers in other countries whose exports were being limited to shift their production elsewhere, and Bangladesh became an attractive "elsewhere". The result has been considerable investment in the garment sector, first foreign, but then mainly Bangladeshi.
The industry in its present form began in the early 1980s as a joint venture, Daewoo-Desh, between a large enterprise of the Republic of Korea and a Bangladeshi partner, in which the firm of the Republic of Korea supplied technology through overseas technical training of Bangladeshi employees in the designing of patterns and the cutting of textiles to conform to particular garment styles. By fiscal 1983,b 21 enterprises had registered with the newly established Bangladesh Garment Manufacturers and Exporters Association (BGMEA) and reported gross export sales of almost $11 million. By fiscal 1985, 134 firms were registered with BGMEA and export receipts reached $116 million, 12 per cent of total export earnings for the year. The number of registered garment manufacturers has since fluctuated widely (exit as well as entry is very easy in this industry), but export earnings reached $300 million in fiscal 1987, $600 million in 1990 and almost $2 billion by 1995."
Three factors seem to have accounted for the success of the industry in Bangladesh. First was the fact that no major export marketing system was needed, as the industry utilizes instead a much simpler international subcontracting arrangement in which the buyer brings the orders together with the raw materials and the design and cutting specifications to a Bangladeshi garment manufacturer. Second was the establishment of a special bonded warehouse scheme, which made possible the financing on international commercial terms of the material inputs to the manufacturing process. Third was the favourable situation of Bangladesh under the Multi-Fibre Arrangement. Up to 1985, the United States had not imposed any MFA quota ceiling on imports of Bangladeshi garments. Ten years later, the European Union still allowed unrestricted entryd Low labour costs in Bangladesh satisfied a major requirement for competitiveness in the industry; but it was the international subcontracting system, in conjunction with the offshore financing scheme, that enabled the industry to circumvent the constraints on access to technology, input supply, finance and marketing that sometimes bedevil emerging export industries.
Investment requirements have also been quite modest, with as little as $175,000 said to have been needed for fixed capital to set up a small firm.
Thus, although the industry was initially largely foreign -- as firms of the Republic of Korea and Sri Lankan firms in particular sought to evade quota limitations on their exports under the MFA -- it has since become mainly Bangladeshi. Indeed, about 90 per cent of the enterprises registered with the BGMEA are owned by Bangladeshis.
annex table A.14). Coupled with the sharp economic contraction that followed the financial crisis and adjustment programme, Mexico's import volume fell 15 per cent; but Mexico's sales to its major foreign markets, especially the United States, responded briskly to the new price situation: Mexican export volume jumped one quarter for the year.
Argentina maintained its fixed exchange rate to the dollar in 1995, withstanding a major economic contraction in the process; its import volume fell by more than Mexico's. Argentina's exports were robust, however, mainly because import demand in its largest trading partner, Brazil, was surging, as noted above. Indeed, Brazil now takes about a quarter of Argentina's exports, up from less than an eighth in 1990.

The foreign trade of the Central and Eastern European transition economies (CEETEs) mirrored the buoyant economic growth in most of these economies.
The volume of exports grew an estimated 9.5 per cent in 1995 and imports expanded 11 per cent. Similar, if slightly lower, rates of growth are forecast for 1996 (see annex table A.19). In the Baltic States and in countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), there also appears to have been a considerable increase in trade flows.
Throughout the transition economies, the changes in trade flows reflect the transformation of production structures - a central element of the transition process. In almost all cases, since 1990, when the process started in earnest, the pattern has been for the shares of trade with other economies in transition to shrink and the shares going to developed countries to grow. This change accelerated with the collapse of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CMEA) in 1991.
It could be expected that the share of manufactures in total exports would rise over time, but the loss of the captive markets of the former CMEA has also meant a temporary decline in demand for manufactured exports. In the case of the Czech Republic in particular, the share of manufactured exports, particularly machinery and transport equipment, first fell in the 1990s, as it ceased to supply the CMEA markets, but it has grown since. In the case of Hungary and Poland, the share of manufactures has risen during the 1990s, reflecting the expansion of trade in intermediate goods.
CEETE exports are still limited to a relatively few agricultural and industrial products. The latter include clothing, steel products, chemicals, footwear and wood products, produced mostly in the framework of "outward processing"
trade. That is, lower labour costs, easier access to developed-country markets and, in some cases, less strict environmental regulations than in the developed countries make it attractive for producers from those countries to send primary or semi finished products to the CEETE countries for processing and export.
There has, though, been some movement in Hungary and Poland away from traditional export commodities towards locally designed and skill intensive products, including small mechanical and electrical engineering goods.
In the case of almost all the CEETEs, the most dynamic element of exports has been sales to developed economies, especially to the European Union (EU).7 The EU accounts for about 50 per cent of CEETE exports and imports, with Germany being the major partner. Indeed, the deceleration in growth in some of the EU countries in 1995 and early 1996 is one factor behind the slower export growth forecast for 1996.
However, the growing import volume of the CEETEs themselves - 1996 will mark the third consecutive year of annual growth on the order of 10 per cent is beginning to turn the CEETEs into a significant market for each other's products once again, albeit this time the phenomenon is based on market prices rather than negotiated arrangements. The upturn in intra-group trade first appeared in 1994. In 1995, the value of intra group trade flows grew by 25 per cent. Trade between the CEETEs and the CIS countries also expanded.
Exports to developing countries increased compared with 1994.
By the same token, for several years following the dissolution of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR), trade among its former constituent republics - now sovereign States - declined. This was due both to the general economic contraction in the region and to the dramatic efforts of many of these countries to reorient their foreign economic ties away from their erstwhile sister republics in the USSR. Thus, by 1995 Azerbaijan was sending over 80 per cent of its exports to the Islamic Republic of Iran and obtaining over 60 per cent of its imports from the Islamic Republic of Iran and Turkey. China took almost half of Kyrgyzstan's exports and Romania was the destination for half of the Republic of Moldova's exports.
However, by the end of 1995 a certain revitalization of intra-CIS trade became noticeable. In January-February 1996, trade among the CIS countries increased 50 per cent, compared with a year earlier, to reach over $5 billion.
In the first quarter of 1996, the dollar value of the Russian Federation's exports to the CIS countries grew nearly 40 percent, while imports jumped 70 per cent compared with the same period of 1995.
More generally, in the case of the Russian Federation and several other States of the former Soviet Union, foreign trade remains one of the most dynamic sectors of the economy. In the Russian Federation, where trade volume data are not available, the value of exports in dollars grew 18 per cent in 1995 and imports grew 15 per cent.
Although exports do not appear to have been severely affected as yet, one concern in the Russian Federation has been the real effective appreciation of the rouble. With inflation slowing in the Russian Federation, the real value of the exchange rate of the rouble against the dollar has appreciated, although with considerable oscillation. In late summer of 1995, the Russian authorities sought to reduce the fluctuations in the exchange rate by introducing a rouble trading "corridor" within which the exchange rate has since been allowed to move, with some modifications in the corridor's limits and in the procedures for setting the exchange rate. With a gradual managed devaluation of the rouble - which is the declared policy of the Government and the Central Bank of Russia - exports may get an additional boost.

The international prices in dollars of the non-fuel commodities that developing countries export were on average about 11 per cent higher in 1995 than in 1994 (see annex table A.21). However, these prices peaked in the first quarter of 1995 and then slowly retreated (see figure III.2). The recent commodity "boom" thus lasted from the start of the recovery in prices in the second half of 1993 through the dramatic increases of 1994 to the peak, from which point they retreated slightly by the end of the year. Dollar prices in 1996 are expected to remain at roughly the end-year levels if demand keeps pace with the expected steady-but-moderate growth in the global economy.
Average dollar prices can be a misleading measure by themselves, as exchange rates of the dollar change and the dollar prices of other goods change. Indeed, the 1995 increase in average dollar prices of 11 per cent becomes an increase of only 4 per cent when expressed in units of special drawing rights (SDRs), which are a basket of five major currencies (annex table A.21). Alternatively, if the average dollar prices are expressed as a ratio to the dollar prices of the manufactured exports of the developed economies - sometimes called the "real" price of the commodities - the 1995 increase was only about 2 per cent (annex table A.21). Indeed, although the dollar price peak in 1995 was higher than the previous peak in 1989, it was lower than the 1989 level when expressed in real terms (figure III.2).
The largest price gains in 1995 were for industrial raw materials owing to strong demand. The price index for the minerals and metals group rose 20 per cent, compared with agricultural raw materials which rose by 14 per cent.
Increases for individual commodities, such as lead, tin, aluminium, copper, nickel and natural rubber, ranged from 11 to 40 per cent. Producer agreements were successful in reducing excess supplies and strengthening prices of aluminium and tin in global markets.
Food prices increased by 6 per cent as a result of increased demand and supply shortages in global markets. The strongest growth in demand came from developing countries where incomes have been growing steadily in recent years. Lower import tariffs and lower domestic food production in countries undergoing rapid industrialization have contributed to the growing worldwide demand for food commodities such as wheat, rice, beef, poultry, vegetable oils and oilseeds, as well as feed grains such as corn and soy meal. China, in the clearest indication of this trend, became a large net importer in 1995 of rice and corn (commodities that the country used to export in large quantities).
Wheat and corn prices escalated to IS-year highs in March 1996, because of severe weather related damage to crops in the United States amid low stocks and supply shortages among major producers elsewhere in the world. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) estimated that import costs for 88 low-income grain-importing countries would rise by $3 billion in 1996 as a result of the higher prices.
Tropical beverage prices rose only 1 per cent in 1995 under more normal supply conditions than in 1994, when coffee prices had more than doubled following a severe frost in Brazil's coffee-growing region. Prices remained high during the first half of 1995, but declined rapidly after it became apparent that the damage to Brazil's 1995 crop had been less extensive than originally estimated.
Increased exports - triggered, in part, by the high prices - provided a welcome boost in foreign exchange receipts of some low-income suppliers, but also renewed fears of a return to global market conditions of chronic excess supply and low prices. However, an export-retention scheme of the Association of Coffee Producing Countries - comprising major producers in Africa, Asia and Latin America, accounting for 80 per cent of global production - prevented a more precipitous collapse of prices.
The 1995 results more accurately reflected underlying demand and supply conditions in global markets compared with the 1994 situation, when market prices of some commodities were significantly distorted by transactions in commodity-based financial instruments. Speculators were accused by market participants of trading coffee more in futures contracts than in actual supplies of the physical commodity, thus inducing significant volatility. Similarly, the run-up in prices of key industrial minerals and metals in 1994 was partly attributed to record purchases of corresponding futures contracts by investment funds and speculators in anticipation of further price increases. Prices dropped sharply in early 1995, however, as economic growth in the United States slowed, inflationary fears receded and investors retreated from commodity linked assets to more traditional investments in bond and equity markets.

Demand on the international petroleum market strengthened in 1995 and into early 1996. Average oil prices climbed to $16.90 a barrel in 1995, about 9 per cent higher than their level in 1994.9 As a result, total oil revenues of the member countries of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) rose in 1995 by an estimated $13 billion, or 11 per cent over their level in 1994 (see annex table A.43). Notwithstanding this rise, OPEC oil revenues in 1995 remained at no more than one half the 1974 level in inflationadjusted tenns.Indeed, apart from the temporary run-up in oil prices associated with the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, oil prices have been relatively stable in dollar terms (see figure 11I.3).
By April 1996, crude oil prices were at their highest level since 1991.
There were several special circumstances, including low inventory and uncertainty over whether the United Nations would allow Iraq to export some oil to buy food and medicine. Such uncertainty coincided with a surge in world demand for oil owing to the unexpectedly cold winter across the northern hemisphere and the rapid growth in consumption in Asia. At the same time, expectations in the first half of the year that Iraq would soon resume exporting some oil led refiners to lower their inventories; but when those expectations did not materialize, refiners rushed to buy crude oil to meet the rapid rise in demand, particularly for gasoline. When demand for oil increased (partly to build inventories), prices went up. The rise in prices was a boosted further by speculative commodity traders.
In the period ahead, with the onset of warm weather in the northern hemisphere and the anticipated expansion of output from OPEC and non OPEC
producers, prices are expected to decline. The extent of the decline will depend on whether or not Iraq reaches an agreement with the United Nations to export oil. However, because of the sharp and unanticipated rise of oil prices in the first four months of 1996, the average price of oil is likely to be higher for the year as a whole than in 1995. Prices are nevertheless still expected to decline during the remainder of 1996 and into 1997, reflecting mainly the expectations of a partial return of Iraqi oil to the market. Oil prices are thus expected to average $17.50 a barrel in 1996, a rise of almost 4 per cent over the level in 1995.
World oil demand rose by 1.6 million barrels per day, or 2.3 per cent in 1995 (see annex table A.40). Most of the growth came from developing countries, where demand rose by 5 per cent. There was a particularly sharp growth in the countries of South and East Asia (8 per cent) and little or no growth in Africa. Oil consumption in Africa remained nearly static over the past five years, reflecting slow economic growth and, in some cases, shortages of supply.
In the developed economies, oil demand grew 1 per cent, while in the economies in transition, the sharp declines in the demand for oil in each year since 1989 finally ended.
World oil production grew in 1995 almost in line with demand, rising by 1.6 million barrels per day, or 2.3 per cent, over output in 1994 (see annex table A.41). Most of the growth was accounted for by the North Sea and nonOPEC
developing countries. Total production from OPEC, including natural gas liquids, rose only marginally, reflecting the slow growth of demand for its oil. OPEC's decision to maintain the crude oil production ceiling that it had set more than two years ago (24.52 million barrels per day) was in line with the desire of the majority of OPEC members to ensure price stability even at the cost of losing market share to non-OPEC producers.
The rapid growth in non-OPEC supply, combined with the likelihood of a continuation of this trend for the next several years, has begun to change perceptions of the medium-term outlook for oil market developments. The prevailing view in the late 1980s and early 1990s was that declining supplies of some non-OPEC oil and projections of near-term peaks for oilier sources, particularly in the North Sea, would lead to a sharp rise in the call for OPEC oil. That view neglected the positive impact of technological progress on oil supply and underestimated the potential for additions to suppiy from non-OPEC sources.
Indeed, the sharp rise in oil production owing to the commissioning of several new oilfields, resulting from technology-driven cost reductions, made Norway in 1995 Western Europe's biggest oil producer and the world's second largest oil exporter behind Saudi Arabia. Alongside continuing production growth from the North Sea and certain developing countries, the steep decline of production in the United States and the former Soviet Union subsided.
Thus, in spite of an anticipated rapid rise in oil demand, the international oil market will most likely continue to experience excess supplies, as Norway, ilie United Kingdom, the CIS countries and a large number of developing countries continue to add reserves and capacity, as well as absorb a significant share of the increase in world oil demand. Such developments are expected to keep real oil prices constant for the next decade, albeit wiili temporary fluctuations.
Another dimension of the changed prospects of the international oil industry is that it has been encouraged by changes in government policies. The growth in non-OPEC supply was helped by more attractive fiscal incentives in a number of oil-exporting developing countries aimed at foreign oil companies.
These changes have also brought a progressive shift in the policies of a number of OPEC countries that are seeking to tap into the capital, technology and expertise of international oil companies, thus reopening the way for private investment and ending the monopoly of their State-owned oil companies over oil exploration and development. A number of countries, including Algeria, China, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Malaysia, Nigeria, Venezuela, Viet Nam and countries of the CIS, are allowing foreign companies to engage in new exploration as well as participate in further development of already producing oilfields. Thus, a new relationship is emerging between oil-exporting countries eager to make supplies available to a growing market and international oil companies looking for investment opportunities.
At the end of each year, when national statisticians add up their country's total value of exports and imports - whether of merchandise trade, as has been discussed above, or the more inclusive trade in goods and services - the export and import figures are rarely equal. Either some financial flows intervened to provide the foreign exchange to purchase more imports than could be afforded from export earnings or there are extra foreign exchange earnings not spent on imports that were invested or even held in bank accounts. The net amount of these financial flows in a year, the value that is equal in amount and opposite in sign to the balance of trade in goods and services, is called the net transfer of financial resources.
In 1995, the developing countries imported an estimated $38 billion more in goods and services than they exported; that is, the net transfer of financial resources to them was estimated to be $38 billion. On a net basis, the financial resources came from the developed economies. The net transfer of the transition economies taken together, which can be measured only in part, might have been a net inflow or outflow but in either case it was a small amount.
Net transfers and fmancial flows of the de:VC'!ODed economies Much of the net transfer of financial resources of the developed economies takes place among themselves. The United States has long been the largest recipient of net financial transfers and Japan the largest single source of net transfers to other countries; but while the United States' absorption of foreign resources has grown continuously since 1992, the supply of resources from Japan peaked in 1994. Moreover, while Germany has traditionally been a large source of resource transfers to other countries, this ceased to be the case in 1991 when the cost of integrating the eastern Lander (States) into the Federal Republic of Germany absorbed the normally available surplus.
Other developed countries have together taken over the role of supplying resources in large volumes. In 1995, the developed countries excluding Germany, Japan, the United Kingdom and the United States transferred $128 billion, on a net basis. Only $40 billion of this, however, was in the form of net capital flows. Unlike Japan, which is a net creditor country and earns over $40 billion in interest and dividends a year, these countries are net debtors. In 1995, they paid almost $71 billion on a net basis to residents of other countries as interest and dividends (see annex table A.26).
The world's largest net debtor is the United States economy; and with the trade deficit having grown in each year since 1992, the net transfer of financial resources to the United States has also grown, reaching $119 billion in 1995 (see annex tables A.23 and A.26). The net capital flow to the United States was in fact much larger ($185 billion), since in order to obtain the net transfer to the United States of $119 billion, the capital inflow had to be large enough to offset the net foreign payment of interest and dividends, which came to almost $57 billion in 1995.
The dominant vehicle for the financial inflows to the United States in 1995 was portfolio flows (bonds, equities and related financial instruments). The United States received $141 billion in net portfolio inflows in 1995, up from $91 billion in 1994 and an outflow of $31 billion in 1993 (annex table A.26).
A good deal of these inflows did not represent net additions to financing of the trade deficit, however, but a substitution for short-term financial inflows.
Meanwhile, Japan's merchandise trade surplus fell by $11 billion in 1995 and its services deficit rose by $10 billion, making for a decline of $21 billion in Japan's surplus on trade in goods and services and thus a decline in Japan's net financial transfer of $21 billion. However, this was brought about in the most unusual of ways: net capital outflows from Japan dropped not by $21 billion but by over $100 billion (annex table A.26). Indeed, they virtually disappeared.
The reason is that there were large net short-term capital inflows, as the Japanese private sector brought home foreign short-term funds, owing, inter alia, to domestic liquidity problems associated with "bad debt", depressed real estate prices and so on (see chap. V). These short-term dollar inflows, in turn, were absorbed into official reserves, which rose by $110 billion, in an effort to stop the appreciation of the yen to which the inflows were contributing. Combined with small changes in other components of the net transfer, this brought about the $21 billion reduction in the net transfer.

The external financial situation of the transition economies is a mixture of very different experiences. It is estimated that the CIS countries together had a current account surplus and a trade surplus and were thus in effect transferring resources abroad that in a more settled economic environment might instead have been invested domestically (annex table A.24). On the other hand, the CEETEs, where more headway has been made in economic growth (as discussed in chapter II), have been absorbing resources from abroad on a net basis, albeit in modest amounts.
One of the sources of uncertainty facing potential suppliers of funds to CIS, although certainly not the only one, has been the foreign debt of the former USSR, whose disposition had been unresolved. After the dissolution of the Soviet Union, the Russian Federation inherited the foreign debt of the USSR, which totalled $103 billion (including accumulated arrears) as of the end of 1995. The Russian Federation also borrowed about $17 billion under its own name in the intervening years, mainly from official sources, on which it has kept its debt servicing current.
In November 1995, after four years of intensive negotiations, the Russian Federation reached an agreement with the commercial bank creditors of the ex-USSR to reschedule the payment of interest and principal on $32.5 billion of bank loans. Under the terms of the agreement, which did not include any debt forgiveness, the $25.5 billion of principal was to be repaid over 25 years after a 7-year grace period. The $1.5 billion of accrued and unpaid interest for 1994-1995 would be paid by the end of 1996, with the rest of the outstanding interest being converted into 20-year bonds with a 7-year grace period. Then, in April 1996, the Russian Federation reached an agreement with its government creditors (the Paris Club) on the comprehensive rescheduling of ahout $38 billion of debt over the next 25 years. These two debt rescheduling agreements should remove at least this one impediment to new capital inflows.
Although the bulk of the debt restructuring among the CEETEs took place in earlier years, there were certain additional arrangements in 1995. In July, with grants from the World Bank's Debt-reduction Facility and bilateral donors, Albania was able to buy back some $371 million of outstanding commercial bank debt at 26 cents on the dollar.1s In addition, at the end of 1995, Hungary used part of the proceeds of its privatization deals in 1995 to prepay $1.7 billion of its debt to commercial bank creditors. It planned to prepay $4.5 billion owed to multilateral creditors in 1996.
Hungary, which has perhaps the longest experience of the transition economies in the international financial markets, arranged $3.8 billion in gross credits in 1995, mainly in bond issues.1s This accounted for more than half the medium- and long-term private credits of all the transition economies taken together last year (see annex table A.31). In 1994, however, Hungary raised 70 per cent of these funds, which is to say that more transition economies are gaining access to the markets. These economies are also becoming increasingly successful in attracting foreign direct investment flows, which the World Bank estimates rose by almost 50 per cent in 1995.
The transition economies are also major recipients of official financial resources. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) made net disbursements of almost $5 billion to transition economies in 1995 ($9 billion had been committed, two thirds of it to the Russian Federation). These were the largest flows to these countries thus far (annex table A.30); however, with a $10 billion loan to the Russian Federation in 1996, that amount could be surpassed this year. The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) also committed its largest volume of resources thus far, $3.3 billion (annex table A.34). In addition, in April 1996, the shareholders of EBRD agreed to double its capital base to 20 billion European currency units (ECUs) ($25 billion) and to redirect its lending away from the main recipient countries, the higher-income Central European economies, towards the other transition economies. Moreover, of course the transition economies have drawn a significant volume of resources from the World Bank and from bilateral arrangements. In time, all but the lowest-income countries among the economies in transition will draw external financial resources primarily from commercial sources; but for the time being the economies in transition are likely to remain significant users of international official flows.
One concern of high political sensitivity to the developing countries in the 1980s - owing to the economic stress with which it was associated - was that as a group they were making large net foreign transfers of financial resources.
Since 1991, however, the developing countries as a group have been large net recipients of resource transfers, a pattern that continued in 1995 (see table III.l). Among the regions, South and East Asia attracted the largest share of the transfers, following West Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa. Net financial transfers to the least developed countries rose to $12.3 billion.
In Latin America, the positive net transfer of the previous three years was virtually extinguished in 1995, reflecting the import contraction and export expansion in the region that was discussed above. However, when all the standard net financial inflows and investment income payments are added together, it indicates a net inflow of $25 billion, far more than in 1994 and not much below the inflows in the financial "boom" years of 1992 and 1993 (see annex table A.27). Virtually all of those resources, however, were added to official foreign reserves (see annex table A.28).
There were essentially two reasons for this. First, a large part of the resources were official flows, mainly associated with the unprecedented international assistance package for Mexico and a smaller one for Argentina, as well as official flows to other countries, including $600 million to Haiti. While the Haitian package was mainly for essential imports in the post-conflict, peace-building conditions in that country (see chap. VIII), the massive flows to the other countries did not add to import capacity.
In the case of Mexico, they helped the Government of Mexico to redeem the tesobonos (short-term government securities) that began to fall due in February 1996, thereby preventing a new international debt crisis. They also provided a means to add urgently needed liquidity to the Argentine banking system, given the severe limitations on the actions that the Central Bank could take under its currency board system (see box 11.2). In addition, as the loans were to support the central banks of Argentina and Mexico, which had lost considerable foreign exchange reserves during their financial crises, they would naturally be added to reserve levels.
Second, the other major source of inflow to the region was short term capital, attracted especially to Brazil. As already noted, in order to limit the appreciation of its currency, Brazil's Central Bank purchased large volumes of foreign currencies (and sterilized these transactions in order to limit the inflationary impact).
The largest increase in reserves, however, was recorded by China. The monetary authorities in China had adopted a tight monetary policy to fight against doubledigit inflation (see chap. II), while strong financial flows continued to be attracted to the country. Thus, as in Brazil, China's Central Bank absorbed a substantial part of the foreign exchange inflows, increasing official reserves in the process.
China shared with other Asian economies strong inflows from the two main sources of long-term private funds, namely foreign direct investment and lending in the form of bonds and syndicated bank credits. In fact, the virtual explosion in direct investment flows in Asia has been such that the net transfer on direct investment in South and East Asia rose above $40 billion - six times the level of 1990 - and accounted for over 90 per cent of the net transfer to the capital-importing developing countries that is associated with direct investment (see annex table A.27). In fact, the direct investment flow has been quite concentrated. Nine developing countries accounted for about three quarters of the total in 1995; China's share alone was about 45 per cent.
Inflows to Indonesia, among the traditionally preferred destinations of foreign investment, increased significantly in the past year, also as. a result of recent further liberalization of FDL In contrast, the growth of FDI in Malaysia and Thailand has moderated as costs have risen. Both countries are seeking to shift their investment mix to higher value-added industries.
The same group of countries that has attracted the bulk of direct investment have also comprised the dominant developing-country recipients in the international market for long-term private credits. These countries are a key reason that the total amount of such forms of lending to developing countries continued to grow unabated in 1995, despite the difficulties in Latin America (see figure IIL4). Indeed, with reduced private lending to Latin America on this account in 1995, the region's net transfer associated with bond and loan finance became negative. Moreover, the terms of new loans issued to Latin American borrowers toughened in 1995, in line with changed market perceptions of country risk. Yield spreads widened despite the fact that only the best credit risks had access to the market. At the same time, average maturities shortened from four to three years.
Among financial instruments, portfolio equity flows - that is, shares of stock purchased as a financial investment rather than as a direct investment - fell almost 40 per cent in 1995 after dropping a quarter in 1994 from the unprecedented level in 1993. The main reason was the shrinking flows to Latin America that roughly halved in 1994 and then again in 1995. Latin American firms had been the leading beneficiaries of such financing from 1991 to 1993; in the latter year, foreign purchases of Latin American shares peaked at $25 billion. In 1995, they were estimated to have been a little over $6 billion (see table 111.2).22 In any event, this has been a highly concentrated form of finance, with only three countries accounting for 80 per cent of the flows to Latin America (Argentina, Brazil and Mexico) and four countries receiving three fourths of the flows to South and East Asia (Indonesia, the Republic of Korea, Malaysia and Thailand).
Official financing also figured prominently in the developing countries in 1995. Net official credit flows jumped by more than $25 billion, mainly owing to the swift implementation early in 1995 of the emergency financial package for Mexico provided mainly by IMF, the Bank for International Settlements and the United States and another package for Argentina. Indeed, the Mexican loan accounted for $17.8 billion and an Argentine loan for another $2.4 billion of the $23 billion in total IMF commitments to developing countries in 1995, while the drawing down of the Mexican and Argentine loans was the major reason that IMF disbursed $12.5 billion net of repayments to developing countries in 1995, as opposed to the net payments to IMF that characterized most of the previous 10 years (see annex table A.29).
The one other large IMF lending operation for a developing country in 1995 was noteworthy in that it helped raise that year's net concessional flows to developing countries to $1.5 billion (annex table A.29). That operation involved $1.3 billion in Structural Adjustment Facility and Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility loans to Zambia. However, even though the loans were quickly drawn down, Zambia's indebtedness to IMF rose by only $434 million. The loans were mainly used, in other words, to repay the outstanding non-concession al obligations of Zambia that had been in arrears. Zambia has thus completed its "rights accumulation programme" to eliminate arrears to IMF. In effect, Zambia was allowed to refinance its $805 million in overdue debt on concessional terms, while it added new borrowings of over $400 million.
Excluding IMF, the dollar value of multilateral lending and grant arrangements also rose in 1995, although with two disturbing features. First, operations that are mainly for low-income countries declined, in particular, loans of the African Development Bank and the International Development Association of the World Bank and operational programmes of the United Nations system (see annex table A.34). Second, taking all the arrangements together, the total volume measured in constant 1990 dollars fell. In fact, the real value of concessional lending and grant programmes peaked in 1991 and was down 5 per cent by 1995 (see figure 111.5).
There are other indicators of disappointing developments in concessional flows to developing countries. In particular, the volume of official grants to developing countries is estimated to have remained at the low level of 1994, approximately the same level as in the mid-1980s (annex table A.27).
Although grants cover a broader category than development assistance, these data seem to reflect the absolute decline in ODA measured in constant prices that began in 1994. While direct estimates of the flow of ODA in 1995 will be released after this Survey goes to press, available budget data from the major donors suggest that ODA declined again in 1995 in real terms. The primary reason is the sharp decline in aid from the United States. Having already dropped from being the largest donor to the second largest, following Japan (see annex table A.32), the United States is now on track to drop to third place behind France, a country with less than a quarter of the population of the United States. The United States is not, however, the only retrenching donor.

International economic relationships may be largely market-generated and market-determined, but Governments have never taken a completely passive or "hands off" approach to their functioning. Two issues among the many that are in the active agenda of Governments seem to have been particularly salient in 1995 and 1996 and are discussed below.

If there is a common theme in trade policy measures undertaken by Governments in 1995 and 1996, it seems to be the negotiation of multiple internationallinkages, linkages that tend to be more open than exclusionary. One can see instances of this in the new trade agreement between the Russian Federation and China signed in April 1996, or the August 1995 agreement of the Central European Free Trade Area to accelerate the elimination of duties on most industrial products, followed by its agreement to admit Slovenia, or the first meeting at summit level between the 15 members of the European Union and 10 Asian nations in March 1996, or the July 1995 summit of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) which cleared the path to a single regional market with a common external tariffby 1997, or the decision by Suriname to join CARICOM, or the agreement reached by the Presidents of Kenya, the United Republic of Tanzania and Uganda in March 1996 to seek to relaunch the East African Community (EAC), which has been dormant since 1977, or the enlargement of the European Union from 12 to 15 member countries on 1 January 1995 and the growing list of new applicants to the European Union, or the individual trade and cooperation agreements signed in 1995 and 1996 by the European Union and Israel, Morocco and Tunisia. The list of such events could be much longer and could include a large number of the countries of the world.
These agreements are being negotiated in an increasingly liberal international environment, as the commitments in the Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations begin to be implemented, reducing tariff and non-tariff barriers to trade, and as the World Trade Organization develops. The World Trade Organization has already begun to act as a forum for multilateral negotiations, even if sometimes not all the major trading nations with an interest in a particular subject participate in the negotiations. The World Trade Organization is also becoming a mechanism for dispute settlement to which countries - and increasingly developing countries - seem more and more willing to bring their trade policy complaints.
This notwithstanding, the new negotiations seek to strengthen regional groupings and explicit linkages are emerging between regional groupings. For example, the Southern Cone Common Market (MERCOSUR) of Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay became a customs union in January 1995. The harmonization or elimination of non-tariff barriers was largely completed and a common external tariff, albeit with some exceptions, was put in place. Then in December 1995, the members of MERCOSUR signed a landmark agreement with the 15 members of the European Union, which commits the two groups to the gradual establishment of, potentially, the world's largest free trade zone.
Moreover, in June 1996, Chile is to join MERCOSUR as an associate member, with this leading to the reciprocal elimination of tariffs within a maximum of 18 years. In addition, negotiations are under way between MERCOSUR and Bolivia.
Activities have been intense as well among looser groupings of countries, such as the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum. APEC is a regional grouping of 18 economies that aim to create a free trade area. The third annual APEC summit was held in Osaka, Japan, in November 1995.
APEC members committed themselves there to work for free and open trade and investment within the Asia and Pacific region by the year 2010 for industrialized countries and by the year 2020 for developing economies. The key principles guiding their liberalization efforts include pledges to free trade in all industrial sectors, to allow less advanced economies to meet the plan flexibly and to make any APEC trade concessions ultimately available to the rest of the world on a non-discriminatory basis. While the APEC leaders currently disagree on the depth and speed of tariff reductions, they have agreed to develop individual five-year trade liberalization plans and to present them at the 1996 summit in Subic, the Philippines, in November.
There are also instances of overlapping regional arrangements of different degrees of intensity. For example, regional integration strategies in eastern and southern Africa were pursued most actively through the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA) and the Southern African Development Community (SADC). COMESA is a formal common market, while SADC plans to convert its trade and regional integration strategies into a southern African economic community by the year 2000. The SADC proposals contain provisions for trade liberalization, the free movement of capital, labour and services among member countries and a common currency. Other groupings in the region include the Southern African Customs Union (SACU), EAC as noted above, and the Cross Border Initiative (CBI), or more formally, the Initiative for Promoting Cross-Border Trade, Investment and Payments in Eastern and Southern Africa.
Currently, however, there is relatively little trade among member countries of these groups (for example, 6 per cent of trade of COMESA members and 10 per cent among SADC members is with other members of the same group) and the overlapping memberships, divided loyalties and different goals of each group require a sorting-out and harmonization process as part of future negotiations.
International financial coop,eration in a lean This is a period of re-examination and retrenchment in financial cooperation for development. As discussed one year ago in the 1995 Survey, searching questions were being raised about the goals and efficacy of ODA and about the role of multilateral cooperation in particular.
In the ensuing year, the severity of the cut-back in the overall volume of development assistance was becoming unmistakable, and was particularly clear in the replenishment negotiations for multilateral assistance - which commit donors to shared goals for assistance over a period of years - as well as in annual budget appropriations in several donor Governments. Indeed, in the case of the African Development Fund (ADF), the concessional lending arm of the Mrican Development Bank, there were no new lending arrangements for Mrican countries in 1994 and 1995 because of an inability of the Governors of the Bank to agree upon a replenishment of the Fund (the sixth replenishment had been exhausted at the end of 1993). Since 39 of the 52 Mrican member countries of the Bank were eligible to draw only from the concessional window of the Bank, owing to their poverty and limited debt-servicing capacity, this represented a very costly policy deadlock. Nevertheless, with new management in place at the Bank, prospects for completing the replenishment exercise improved.
Perhaps the most closely watched of the multilateral refunding exercises has been that of the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank. IDA is the largest concessional lender to low income developing countries, having committed $7.3 billion in 1994, but only $6 billion in 1995 (annex table A.34). IDA credits are given on financially very advantageous terms: loans have a maturity of 35 to 40 years with a lO-year grace period and a service charge of only 0.75 per cent per year. IDA provides credits to 78 of the world's poorest countries.
The period for lending under the tenth replenishment of IDA was set to expire on 30 June 1996 and no agreement for the eleventh replenishment was in place as 1995 ended. Finally in March 1996, donors agreed to a new financing package for the three-year period that the eleventh replenishment was meant to cover. The package broke formerly fixed rules of burden-sharing among the donors, but at least it allowed IDA to remain an active lender after 1 July.
The IDA package began with a one-year interim fund of about $3 billion to which the United States would not contribute. It would consequently not take part in the decision-making on the loans extended from these funds, nor would its firms be eligible to compete for procurement contracts under the new loans.
The United States Administration instead undertook to pay $934 million that was owed under the tenth replenishment of IDA. For the second two years, all IDA
donors would contribute about $4 billion in each year. If these funds had been the only ones available for IDA lending, the arrangement would have entailed a major cut-back in the value of IDA lending. However, it was expected that principal repayments on older IDA loans plus contributions from the World Bank would enable IDA to lend a total of about $22 billion over the three-year period.
While the outlook for aDA has become bleak, it seems that the debt situation of some of the low-income developing countries is being seen in a new light. After all, another way to increase the net transfer of resources to a country besides increasing aid inflows is to reduce debt servicing outflows. Significant progress has been made recently in the international debt strategy for handling the debt difficulties of a group of low-income heavily indebted countries.
Indeed, one issue for discussion at the June summit meeting of the seven major industrialized countries (G-7) is a set of proposals for alleviating the debtservicing burden of 8 to 20 developing countries.The proposals had been discussed by finance ministers of these and other countries at the April meetings in Washington, D.C., of the IMF Interim Committee and the IMFlWorld Bank Development Committee, but only a framework was agreed upon at that time.
Ministers requested that the Bank and the Fund in close collaboration with all involved creditors and donors put forward specific proposals by their next meeting in September. The G-7 summit is thus an important opportunity to forge agreement among the major creditors and donors on such specifics.
The main advance at the April meeting was the formal recognition of a point, argued by the United Nations30 and others, that for some countries the "existing mechanisms appear inadequate to secure a sustainable external debt position over the medium term". Also, since the outstanding debt for the countries in question is owed mainly to Governments and multilateral institutions,32 both would need to accord relief in order to adequately help those countries.
The proposals before the G-7 thus involve greater relief from the Paris Club, the creditor forum in which bilateral debt is restructured, and some mechanism for relief from multilateral debt servicing. The best terms currently available from the Paris Club (called the Naples terms, after the G-7 summit at which they were agreed) allow 67 per cent of "eligible" debt to be written off. The new proposal could raise that proportion to 90 per cent. As to multilateral debt, there is no possibility of formally forgiving such debt, owing to the "preferred creditor status" of the Bank and the Fund, and so proposals have focused on how to help the debtors make their payments. One proposal is to use profits from World Bank operations to help service World Bank loans (comparable arrangements could be made at the regional development banks); another is to sell some of the gold held by IMF, set up a fund with the proceeds and use the earnings of the fund to help pay the interest on IMF loans. In any case, these are the kinds of issues on which decisions could be advanced at the G-7 summit.
The issue at stake in the new stringency of ODA flows and in the difficult replenishments of the multilateral facilities was of course a budgetary one for many donors; however, setting the amounts in question against the total expenditures or even, say, only the military expenditures of the donor countries underlines just how small those amounts are. The financial constraint cannot have been the dominant factor. Indeed, certain donors, such as Denmark, the Netherlands, Norway and Sweden, find it possible to budget more than 0.7 per cent of their gross domestic product (GDP) for ODA. Rather, a major reassessment among donors is occurring - including the contributors at the high end of the league tables of aid effort - concerning what the multilateral institutions and ODA in general should do and their effectiveness in doing it.
The World Bank had been studying its own operations - non concessional as well as concessional lending programmes - for several years and the IMF/World Bank Development Committee in April 1994 agreed to establish a task force on multilateral development banks to review the operation of the World Bank and the four main regional banks. In its April 1996 meeting, the Committee generally endorsed the conclusions and recommendations of the task force and called for wide dissemination of its report.
Developing-country finance ministers in the Group of 24 also reviewed the report and, while commending it, they expressed reservations about some conditions that might increasingly be attached to lending programmes as a result of the report, in particular concerning issues of good governance and civil society, matters that traditionally fall within the jurisdiction of borrowing Governments.
Moreover, "ministers expressed serious concerns about the use of environmental, governance, human rights, labour standards or other issues to further protectionist interests in industrial countries".
Certainly, the developing-country ministers have identified a possible serious misappropriation of what would in general be laudable concerns of the international community. Indeed, these concerns seem to have taken a major place in the thinking of the donor countries. The Development Assistance Committee (DAC), the donor forum of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), has been reviewing strategic requirements for development cooperation over the next two decades. The DAC High-Level Meeting in early May 1996 of development ministers, heads of aid agencies and other senior officials responsible for development cooperation was expected to try to agree on concrete, realizable goals for development cooperation in the twenty first century. The goals would emphasize working with recipient countries to improve specific indicators of economic, social and environmental well-being and foster self-sustaining capacity development for effective, democratic and accountable governance. The possible new strategy was expected to be taken up at the ministerial meeting of OECD later in May and by the summit meeting of the seven major industrialized countries in June.
Investment is an important concern in today's world, and most observers want to see more of it. It can bring about important and desirable economic and social changes, most dramatically in helping post-conflict societies to :fmd a practical basis for peace-building and social reintegration. Investment can also speed the adoption of new labour-saving technologies, although for workers that can be a legitimate source of anxiety. In transition economies, one of the key concerns is to overcome the transition shock, caused when central planning was discarded and suddenly much capital stock was rendered obsolete and relatively worthless. In developing countries, policy makers have experimented with a variety of strategies and approaches to increasing investment and malring it more productive, and they have met with very different degrees of success.
Investment in the context of the present part of the Survey may be understood in various ways, so that a definition is called for in order to give a degree of precision to the discussion. Although finance influences both the levels and direction of investment (see chap. V below), financing decisions and financial instruments are not part of investment per se. Thus, investment in the present discussion refers to the "real" economy, that is, to production of and expenditure on real goods and services, or to put it another way, it refers to changes in the stock of capital. And while the term "capital", may refer to a variety of phenomena, in the present discussion it refers in the conventional sense to "produced means of production". This is a narrower definition than may be suitable for other types of analysis, such as studies of environmental degradation, questions of biodiversity or human capital.
The term "capital" as used here, then, is quite precise: "gross fixed capital formation". It is an activity of producers, which may be firms, Governments or households; it is the value of the fixed assets acquired during a given period, such as one year, less the proceeds from disposals; the assets in question are produced assets, such as machinery, equipment, buildings, other structures and various forms of intellectual property; and the assets must be usable over more than one period.1 Even in limiting the discussion to the traditional concept of fixed investment, the matter remains extremely complex. The essence of investment is that it involves the purchase, production or other acquisition of a very diverse group of assets that are intended to increase the production of consumption or investment goods or services in future periods. Investment stubbornly resists straightforward measurement, as will be discussed below, and has also been difficult to conceptualize at the theoretical level. The simplifications that mainstream economists have employed to make their models tractable - as if capital were a single homogeneous mass that could be bought and sold for a price in a market - are not readily translated into the real world. One of the foremost theorists of modern economics and and a Nobel laureate, the late Sir John Hicks, gave a relevant warning: "[The theorist's simplifying assumption is not] wrong if it is regarded as no more than a device for preliminary exploration...[But] when a model of this kind...is directly applied to real problems, the result is likely to be misleading.
The 'capital substance', which has a definite meaning in the model (so many bushels of corn, so many machines), becomes in application a metaphysical entity. Like other metaphysical entities, it is a boat that is loose from its moorings. It is the big thing that is wrong with classical theory."2 Analysis of the role of investment in economic growth has come a long way from earlier, more mechanistic approaches. But studies undertaken at the United Nations and elsewhere in recent years have raised new questions about our understanding of investment, such as whether investment data are statistically comparable as measured across countries and over time, thus challenging analysis that is based on such data. They also reflect a greater appreciation that policy prescriptions have seen swings in fashion and that policycmaking is a subtle art.
The considerations that enter into policy analysis are generally quite complex, as will be demonstrated below. Policy analysis is not readily amenable to elegant theoretical exercises, nor is it reducible to instruction manuals. Policy analysis is perforce a matter of looking at the experiences of others and learning from them. It is about decision-making in an often highly charged political environment. It is a matter of capturing opportunities and evading limitations that can be created by other players. It is, finally, a matter of weighing pros and cons, of finding compromises between the desirable and the doable. In short, it is far more an art than a science.
The methodology for a deeper understanding of policy issues in the realm of investment requires substantial efforts in comparative description. Much of what is contained in the chapters in the present part of World Economic and Social Survey is meant as a contribution in that direction. The present chapter thus seeks to highlight the inevitable data difficulties that should be kept in mind in reading subsequent chapters.
One of the perils for a policy analyst to avoid is drawing conclusions from erroneous data and then giving misleading policy recommendations. The most basic assessments that an analyst of investment in a country seeks to make such as whether the amount of investment is high or low or whether it is growing or shrinking - are not straightforward assessments to make. An analyst should not simply take the aggregate data for a given country at face value, for two basic reasons: (a) coverage may not be complete; and (b) observations may not be comparable.
A good working hypothesis to apply in the very first examination of an investment policy question is that the basic macroeconomic data on investment in any country are incomplete. Investment data in national accounts are generally gathered from the formal economy, that is, legally established enterprises, professions and public-sector activities. Sometimes, estimates are also made of the rest of the economy, the informal sector. All economies have informal sectors, and in the developed economies they are typically considered a relatively minor part of economic activity.3 However, in some cases - transition economies being a case in point, as discussed in the introduction to the statistical annex - the informal economy can account for a substantial share of gross output and of investment.
In many developing countries, the informal economy may be a subsistence sector that only participates at the margin in the larger market economy. Like output, capital formation in the subsistence sector can be expected to be underestimated as well because it escapes the recording authorities, particularly in countries where investments in such activities as land improvements or cattle raising are often not included in national accounts statistics.4 A second pitfall in the measurement of investment lies in the comparability of investment data over time. Again, like output, investment is generally measured for national accounts in both current prices and prices of a base year.
Measuring investments in prices of a base year allows inferences to be drawn about changes in the volume of investment. In other words, the total expenditure in different years on machinery, equipment, new structures and capital improvements can be calculated in terms of the prices at one point in time. But that practice gives rise to index-number problems, which are inherent in all efforts to measure real changes in a composite value made up of changing quantities and prices.
The difficulty is that if you want to measure the change in "real" investment between two years, then the measured amount of the change will differ depending on whether you use the first year's prices as the base year or the second year's prices. If the two years are close together in time, the differences may be trivial; but the greater the separation in time, the greater the potential for differences will be. In national accounts data, the typical practice is to fix a base year and then calculate the volume measure for the full series of available years in the prices of the base year. As time passes and the base year slips further and further into the past, it becomes less and less meaningful to the current period.
Statistical methods exist to address that problem, the most notable recent example of which is the annual chain-weighted volume measures for GDP and its components adopted by the Government of the United States of America, wherein the volume change between two adjacent years is the average of the change as expressed in the prices of each separate year, a technique to be recommended, albeit a demanding one in terms of timeliness of information and expenditures by statistical services.5 But the measurement problem is actually broader than that. Many capital goods are built to order and are thus unique, such as ships, aircraft, special ized machinery and factory buildings. The creation of a standard price index over time for unique goods is thus impossible by definition; indirect indices must be created if such goods are to be included in a measure of real investment.
For that reason, the volume of construction, in particular, is sometimes estimated by deflating construction expenditures by indices of input costs, many of which are simple averages of wage rates and list prices, a procedure which assumes that there has been no change in construction technology over the period indexed.
Sometimes, construction cost indices are adjusted for estimated changes in labour productivity, again depending on available data. Thus, price indices for residential housing may be based on labour costs calculated from an index of earnings and data on material inputs and hours worked. Assuming that the amount of materials used per worker is a measure of output produced per worker, a price index can be calculated. In order to arrive at an index for all construction, it may then be further assumed that price movements in one area of the construction industry are indicative of those occurring in all types of construction, and that construction cost movements in the public sector are the same as in the private sector.
Comparable problems arise when new standard products are introduced and old products disappear, or when the quality of a product changes so dramatically as to make it essentially a different product. The virtual disappearance of manual typewriters and the burgeoning use of personal computers are cases in point and a source of major measurement difficulties pertaining to investment.
One measurement problem that leaps out at the analyst arises when national accountants update the base year of their data and recalculate the volume of investment over the historical period using the new base year: what happens is that the historical data change!
For all the above-mentioned reasons, data on investment at constant prices from many countries must be considered only a rough indication of the underlying real volume of capital formation. Sometimes, however, even highly unreliable data do not exist. Economists and policy makers, by default, must then rely instead on the measurement of investment in current prices, which will say something about the value of expenditures but nothing about the amount of investment goods purchased. In highly inflationary environments, such statistics would be virtually impossible to interpret. In any event, economists commonly seek to avoid dealing with a pure value total by normalizing the values, such as by expressing them as a share of GDP, with both variables measured at current prices.
The ratio of investment to GDP would give a reasonable indication of changes over time in the unmeasurable volume of investment if the average prices of the goods and services in GDP and in investment moved in parallel;
there is no reason, however, to presume that that is the case. For example, when a country devalues its currency and investment goods are largely imported, the prices of investment goods may increase more than the prices of other GDP components, with the result that the measured ratio of investment to GDP
in nominal terms will rise even if there has been no change in the volume of investment (see box IV.I).
When acountry devalues and most of its investment goods are imported, it is very likely that the measured share of investment in GOP at current prices will increase even if the quantity of investment remains unchanged. The following exercise illustrates that phenomenon with the help of atable, taking as as an example the experience of Cote d'ivoire after the devaluation of its currency (the CFA franc) relative to the French franc (FF) in January 1994.
The starting point of the exercise is abre1;lkdown of the main expenditure components of GOP in 1993, which, have been normalized so that the total value of GOP equals 100 units instead of 2,640 billion CFA francs. Thus, the values in the first column of the table represent the shares of the main expenditure components in 1993.
In January 1994, the exchange rate fell from 50 CFA francs per FF to 100 CFA francs per FF. Assuming that quantities stayed the same and only prices changed (which is of course unrealistic since demand would have declined when prices increased), then the prices and thus the values of exports, imports and imported investment and consumption goods would all have doubled in 1994 in terms of domestic currency.
The actual GOP deflator of Cote d'ivoire increased by 39 per cent in 1994. If the tradable goods prices doubled as .assumed above, it would mean that the prices of non-tradables in GOP would have had to rise by 14 per cent in order to get the 39 per cent for the country as a whole. Because the quantities are assumed to remain constant. the nominal values of each category of expenditure are given in the third column of the table as the product of the initial values and the new prices. The fourth column shows what would have been the shares of the GOP components at the assumed new prices: investment as ashare of GOP is shown to have increased by 2percentage points.
Had that been an actual increase, it would have represented aconsiderable accomplishment, but the increase was entirely spurious since all volumes were assumed not to have changed. The last column indicates the actual 1994 shares of the expenditure components of GOP in Cote d'ivoire; it shows that the actual investment share was only about 1percentage point larger than the one predicted by the present exercise, suggesting that the 1994 increase in investment share at current prices was largely a price effect. In 1995, however, the investment share rose again and this time there was no comparable distortion from a price effect (see chap. VII).
All the difficulties that arise in comparing investment volumes over time also arise in comparing investment volumes across countries, that is, there are inherent index number problems. In fact, price surveys in a broad range of countries indicate that in developing countries, investment goods are expensive relative to the other components of CDP, and the poorer the country the more expensive they are. Thus, for 12 poor countries (out of a sample of 60 countries), investment accounted for 21 per cent of CDP in 1980 when measured in actual national prices but only 13 per cent when measured in average prices of the full range of countries. At the other extreme, for the richest 14 countries, investment accounted for about 24 per cent of CDP when measured in national prices and about 26 per cent of CDP
when measured in average prices."
The solution to the problem in this case is not necessarily to carry out the comparison in terms of the global average prices. Since the weight of the developed countries counts so heavily in the global average, the recalculation of their investment expenditure in the common prices does not change their investment ratio very much from the level found using national prices. But for the low-income developing countries, the "common" prices were not common at all. It is thus not at all clear how to interpret the large mark-down of the ratio of investment to CDP of poor countries once their data are converted to common world prices. Certainly if the example were for a time series and the comparison was of 1970 data in 1990 prices, the analyst would greatly discount the usefulness of the result.
The question of unique goods and comparability of goods also applies to comparisons among developed economies. A case in point is the different intensities of use in Japan and the United States of America of two communication technologies: local area networks (LANs) of personal computers and fax machines. Whereas 52 per cent of personal computers in the United States were connected to LANs in 1993, less than 9 per cent were so connected in Japan. And while there were an estimated 24 fax machines per 1,000 residents in the United States in 1992, there were 33 per 1,000 residents in Japan. The lower LAN share in Japan partially reflected higher costs of LAN services in that country, but an important factor that is often neglected is the nature of Japanese writing. The Japanese language employs thousands of characters, compared with less than 100 characters and often about 25 letters in European languages. Handwriting has been much more common in Japan than using a keyboard, which has led to the wider use of fax machines to send messages in Japan than in the United States. The functionality of each piece of equipment has thus been very different in the two countries, so that it would make little sense to say that the price of personal computers relative to the price of fax machines in Japan should bear a close relationship to the same price ratio in the United States.]
In other words, intercountry as well as inter-temporal comparisons of investment expenditure involve significant index number problems that are in their nature insoluble. Thus, the analyst would do well not to rush to a policy conclusion from observing that, say, a given country has a 21 per cent investment ratio as calculated from national data but a 13 per cent investment ratio as calculated using international prices. Instead, it would be advisable to examine the composition of investment expenditure, the degree of new capital formation and replacement, the capacity expansion and productivity enhancement of the investment and so on. In short, it is necessary to go beyond aggregate numbers to assess the actual situation.
In the late 1980s, Robert Solow, an American economist and Nobel laureate, pointed to the paradox that the computer revolution had not led to a surge in productivity measured as output per hour of work. Updated versions of the statistics then being used indeed show that productivity in the non-farm sector of the United States economy rose by 0.7 per cent per year from 1980 to 1990, the same as the 0.7 per cent annual rate for 1974-1979, and considerably less than the 2.6 per cent recorded during 1960-1973. Then, in 1991-1994, there was a recovery in productivity growth to 1.6 per cent per year, which would seem to have partially resolved the paradox (see table IV. I).
However, that was something of a statistical illusion. The recent change in the method used by the United States Government for calculating "real" output, which seeks to minimize the index-number problems noted above, has had the effect of increasing the measured growth of output in the relatively distant past and decreasing it in relatively recent years. As a result, the average growth of productivity for the period 1991-1994 fell to 1.2 per cent, while the rate for 1980-90 rose to 0.9 per cent. Moreover, not only has the recent growth of productivity now been seen to be slower than previously measured, but a comparison of the growth of productivity in the 1990s period with the 1960s period now shows an even sharper slow-down than before;
the Solow paradox remains.
The analyst seeking to explain the Solow paradox might begin by examining whether a fall in investment could provide an explanation. The first place one might look for systematic data would be aggregate investment as reported in the national accounts. The share of investment in GDP did indeed fall in the 1980s, reaching a low in the 1991 recession (see table A.5). Thus, perhaps there was less integration of computers into the workplace than had appeared.
Nevertheless, the same data show that the share of investment in GDP has been rising since the recovery began.
In fact, the investment data just cited, which were in current prices, underestimated the actual performance of investment even in the 1980s, owing to the falling price of investment goods relative to the general goods and services that comprise GDp'l1 Moreover, for purposes of an analysis of productivity growth in the business sector, data for a narrower category of investment is most appropriate, that is, data for the performance of private fixed investment in constant prices are most relevant. As may be seen in figure IV.l, the share of real private fixed investment in GDP in the United States of America, based on the recently revised data, has remained fairly constant over 35 years, cyclical movements notwithstanding. In addition, the share of residential and non-residential construction has fallen over time, while that of producers' durable equipment has risen. Indeed, real expenditure on equipment - the category of investment spending that includes the computer investment the effects of which Professor Solow was expecting to find - has been the most dynamic component of business investment.
Information-processing and related equipment, moreover, accounted for about one third of expenditures on producers' durable equipment in 1995, while computers and related equipment comprised about one third of the information processing expenditures. About the same proportions applied in 1985, albeit for qualitatively different equipment.
According to the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, much of the business fixed investment that has taken place in recent years in the United States of Amedca and other industrialized countries has been geared to replacing spent or obsolete equipment,13 which is as expected since in more mature economies like the United States long-term growth is more likely to depend on the country's ability to adopt increasingly productive technologies than on capital deepening per se. The replacement of old machinery would thus be expected to be associated with higher productivity growth since the new inventions and techniques are embodied in the new machinery. Computer-related investment provides the most striking case in point.
The advances in information-processing technology have changed the types of machinery and equipment purchased and their uses, with purchases increasingly concentrated in computer-assisted equipment. Increasingly, technologies of processing, creation and assembly are coordinated by computers.
The merging and synthesis of advanced technologies in the areas of telecommunications, computer networking and automation have encouraged a trend away from highly specialized machinery towards the use of more flexible equipment that can be redesigned, reprogrammed or retooled easily and quickly.
The result has been more customized, higher quality products than were produced by the traditional assembly-line approach. Manufacturers are increasingly using more flexible machinery that can be adapted quickly to the production of new products. Computer-aided design equipment and new communication technologies are enhancing firms' abilities to re design products quickly so as to produce customized output in response to changing customer demand.
Indeed, industry-level studies suggest that in manufacturing the expected productivity increases have been taking place. In the manufacturing of the new high-technology equipment itself, large productivity gains have been registered:
in all the major economies, labour productivity in the office and computer machinery sector has been growing at an annual average rate of 17-26 per cent in the period 1980-1990.15 Moreover, in the manufacturing sector of the United States as a whole, productivity rose at the average annual rate of a 3.1 per cent from 1991 through 1994, a distinctly better performance than the 2.6 per cent improvement in the 1980-1990 period.
Many segments of the service sector are also experiencing a wave of new production processes, similar to that of the manufacturing sector. Indeed, in the period from 1985 to 1990, banks in the United States increased their equipment by approximately 75 per cent and securities firms increased theirs by more than 200 per cent. Those figures cover only physical equipment and not the substantial expenditures on software and on software maintenance.
Overall, technology expenditures by American banks and securities firms rose from less than 5 per cent of total expenditures in 1980 to about 20 per cent in the early 1990s.
New technologies, which are more flexible and multipurpose, are not simply automating traditional activities but are causing a complete redesign of the entire array of services available to clients. Related activities are being combined.
One example is the unified bank statement sent to retail clients that contains information about all of their business with the bank. In addition, mortgages are now processed much more quickly and in much greater volume.
Client service has been further enhanced by the widespread introduction of automatic teller machines and by automatic deposit and withdrawal services.

There is no single explanation that convincingly explains why the productivity increases at the aggregate level that might have been expected from the shift of investment to high technology capital goods have not yet been seen.
Many of the partial explanations say, in essence, that the problem is one of measurement and that the productivity gains have actually taken place.
It is difficult to measure accurately at the aggregate level the effect of the many rapid changes in the prices and quality of both inputs and outputs, a difficulty that has increased over the past decade owing to an increase in the share of output that reflects ideas and services rather than physical substances.
For instance, when compiling aggregate measures for output and productivity, the growth of real output in the banking and other financial services sectors is assumed equal to the increase in hours worked in those industries, with other inputs being ignored. Therefore, growth in their labour productivity is zero by assumption. Yet, according to estimates of the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics, which are not used in the construction of aggregate measures, productivity growth in the banking industry has averaged more than 2 per cent per year in the 1990s.
Measurement issues are also important in other service areas, including health care. Here current productivity measures would not reflect explicitly the effect of technological advances that allowed a patient to be treated and to recover in a much shorter time than previously.
A possible reason why computers may not yet have brought about a major increase in measured output and productivity growth is that they are still a small component of the capital stock.In the United States, computing equipment by 1994 accounted for only 2 per cent of the net current-dollar stock of private non-residential equipment and structures. Hence, it has been suggested that computing equipment can be productive at the level of the firm and yet make little contribution to aggregate growth.
The measurement of the capital stock is itself fraught with difficulties. The shift to shorter-lived capital goods has been reflected in an increase in the estimated depreciation of the capital stock. Depreciation in 1990 accounted for about 75 per cent of United States gross investment, as against 60 per cent in 1970. The share of depreciation in gross fixed capital formation has also risen in the other major developed countries. If inadequate allowance were made for the rate at which equipment loses value as a result of obsolescence, as might be expected at a time of rapid technological advance, then the slow-down in the growth of the capital stock would be even greater than the official figures suggest, which could help explain the Solow paradox.
Other factors unrelated to measurement difficulties have also been suggested as possible explanations of the paradox. One is that productivity statistics have accurately captured the sectoral differences in productivity growth and that those differences have been important. In that argument, as industries with high-wage workers are downsized and new equipment is substituted for labour, redundant workers pour into lower-wage and lower-productivity jobs. The larger number of workers in those sectors holds down wage growth there, leaving employers without a strong incentive to invest in productivity enhancement.
Another argument is that the productivity gains from the new technology have not fully materialized because such impediments as inadequacies in training, the lack of appropriate application software or a failure to undertake organizational restructuring have slowed down their diffusion.For instance, the incorporation of a major new technology may not be very effective unless production processes as well as firms' organizational structures are thoroughly rethought. But it may take some time for re-engineering efforts to be translated into increased production; and besides, some existing production systems simply cannot be integrated easily with the new information and communication equipment. In those circumstances, it might be preferable to delay updating the existing physical capital until it has come to the end of its economic life.
That argument suggests, in other words, that productivity will rise as experience with new equipment grows.
Weak demand is another factor that, in principle, could explain the sluggish growth in measured productivity. The productivity numbers reflect how many pieces of output workers actually make in an hour; they do not reflect how many pieces they could make if demand were sufficient for the plant to be operated at full capacity.
According to that argument, since investment has been an early expenditure component to emerge from recession - or was maintained to an unusual degree during the recession - firms may have been investing ahead of demand when they might have postponed their equipment purchases until demand pressures warranted it. In the case of Canada, the strength of investment by Canadian firms during the second half of the 1980s and the early 1990s actually contributed to the fall in the measured productivity of capital during the last recession, as the continued rapid growth in capital inputs exceeded the increase in production.
The question to ask of that argument is why the tendency to invest ahead of demand would only arise now. One answer might be that many of those investments constituted a massive renewal of production processes, and given the observations made above about training and software and the general matter of breaking in new equipment and routines, a period of slow sales might have been seen as having advantages for investment in the new processes. The high rate of modernization of machinery and equipment may mean that firms expected a vigorous recovery in demand to emerge and thus wanted to be positioned to meet it with higher productivity production processes at the appropriate time.
Perhaps the answer to the paradox is indeed that it is too early to judge because the lag in the acceleration of productivity growth is relatively insignificant.
Future figures would then reveal the full extent of the productivity enhancements spurred by technological advances and embodied in the wave of investments.
For the moment, however, that is only speculation. The frank answer is:
"We do not know".
One conclusion from the preceding discussion seems to be that the policy analysis of investment requires working with data that only very imperfectly capture the real underlying economic relationships in an economy. That problem was demonstrated in the above analysis of the Solow paradox, in spite of the fact that the United States has one of the best statistical systems in the world.
In many countries, funding limitations and a lack of expertise have prevented statistical services from contributing as much as they might to policy analysis. It is extremely shortsighted, however, to curtail important statistical activities in order to contribute what are typically small amounts to governmental budget consolidation. Better statistical data may not by themselves solve many problems, but poorer data will certainly increase the burden on decision makers.
For much of the post-war era, economists have relegated most policy discussions of imancial sector operations in developed and developing, centrally planned and transition economies to "microeconomic"
analyses of investment. These are questions that concern the composition of investment expenditures and involve issues such as differential access to investment credit of large versus small firms, big-city versus rural needs, established versus start-up companies, public versus private sector borrowers, and so on. Yet "macroeconomic"
investment questions - those concerning the total amount of investment in an economy - also can involve financial sector issues, such as arise when financial factors change the capacity or willingness of banks to lend to the business sector in a boom or recession, or during economic transition, or after an economic "shock".
The question of the relevance of imance in explaining investment at the macroeconomic level extends to the operations of the normally working developed economy. Theorists who view businesses as exhibiting behaviour close enough to that of a model firm malcing investment decisions in a frictiomess, competitive environment with no policy distortions tend to treat the investment decision as separable from the imancing one. Those who say that asymmetries in the information available to borrowers and lenders are a fundamental aspect even of today's highly sophisticated imancial sector argue that imancial conditions should affect the level of investment. Both camps see imancial conditions as playing a role in cases where markets are imperfect and economies are developing or in transition. I
In the chapters that constitute the bulk of the present part of the Survey, financial sector determinants of investment - in their macroeconomic and microeconomic dimensions - will enter the discussion at many points, although they certainly do not tell the entire story in any of the case studies. As a prelude to those discussions, it seems useful to examine a case of which it can be said, with the benefit of hindsight, that imancial sector operations had much to do with an unusual set of investment outcomes. This is the case of investment in Japan from the late 1980s to the present.
It also seems useful to consider in a frank way a financial sector policy measure affecting the composition of investment that in broad debates is often held in low repute, but that in practice is still regarded as having a role to play, namely, policy interventions in credit markets and in particular "directed credit". The conclusion of this discussion will be that blanket condemnation of the policy is unwarranted and unrealistic, and that such a policy option is best considered in a limited and time-bound manner. To consider how the use of a given policy instrument should evolve over time - with the understanding that in many cases its life should be limited - might be a general prescription for policy makers. A policy that works well in one period of a country's development might be superseded by a different policy for a new era.
The success of the Japanese economy has traditionally depended on high rates of growth of investment, leading to large increases in labour productivity.
Japan developed investment opportunities through its imaginative exploitation of the possibilities that technological advances either in Japan or in other countries were opening up. Japanese companies excelled in the design and manufacture of high-quality and high-technology products. However, while technological advances and the declining relative price of capital goods were raising investment in other countries in the 1990s, Japanese investment growth slowed down and then investment levels began to fall in 1992.
In part, this was an expected element of the economic recession in Japan that had begun in 1992; but the depth and duration of the low levels of investment were a cause of some concern. The recent decline in investment can only be compared with the decline of 20 years ago, after the first oil crisis (see figure V.l). Even so, the recent decline has lasted longer and the contraction in private, non-residential investment has been deeper than in the 1970s episode.
Also, the earlier decline had been triggered by the sharp rise in oil prices. It was a purely external shock. In this case, it seems that much of the decline in investment can be explained in terms of traditional economic relationships in Japan. The delayed recovery, however, constitutes a new dimension and a clue that more than the usual factors were at work.

To a degree, the recent behaviour of investment in Japan can be explained by the operation of traditional macroeconomic determinants of investment in that country. In particular, a simple "accelerator model" seems to explain recent Japanese investment behaviour reasonably well, at least up to a point.2 This model assumes that firms have a desired or target stock of plant and equipment that they wish to maintain in order to produce an expected level of output under normal conditions. The ratio of the desired level of capital stock to the expected level of output is fixed by technical and cost factors and is called the capital coefficient or capital-output ratio. At any point in time, the current level of any firm's capital stock would usually not equal the desired level and thus firms would seek to adjust their capital stock towards the desired level.
In practice, the model is applied not to individual firms or industries, but to the economy as a whole, with output being measured as gross domestic product (GDP). That is to say, the capital coefficient that drives this model is thought of as an average for the country as a whole or, more precisely, for the private sector as a whole.3 It is also considered to be a medium-term phenomenon (referring to normal output produced under normal conditions and costs).
In particular, the capital coefficient is expected to rise over time, reflecting the increasing research and capital intensity of production by an increasingly productive workforce.
When the current level of capital stock is less than the desired level, investment rises to fill the gap. The desired higher level reflects the need for additional capital to produce a larger flow per year. The term "acceleration"
comes from the hypothesis that investment responds to changes in the flow of output, to the acceleration or deceleration in the demand. In any event, investment fills only part of the gap and the speed of gap-filling is itself something to be analysed.
In fact, throughout the 1980s, the actual capital coefficient as calculated from data on Japan's private capital stock and aggregate output remained fairly close to the trend over the same period (see figure Y.2). IT the trend had in fact been the target level over time, then the result shown in figure V.2 would mean that the actual level was in some periods slightly above, and in other periods slightly below, the desired level. The first case would imply that there had been excess capacity at the time and the second case that plants had been operated at more than usual intensity, for example, with workers doing extra shifts.
Beginning in the second half of 19876, however, as may be seen in figure Y.2, the capital coefficient fell under the trend and remained there for several years. It can be seen from the figure that the growth of output was relatively strong in this period and thus that the capital stock was used relatively intensively.
This seemed to be a signal to firms to increase their rate of investment, at least that would have been the characteristic response if they had expected the strong growth of the volume of sales to continue, and the investment data in figure V.l and the closing of the gap in figure Y.2 indeed suggest that their response was exactly the characteristic one. Then, in 1992, the recession and subsequent economic stagnation brought demand sharply down and productive capacity became underutilized. Not surprisingly, investment fell. Indeed, private, non-residential investment fell about 9 per cent in 1993 and fell again by 6 per cent in 1994. These drops were, however, somewhat larger than expected.
Another viewpoint on the relationship between investment and the desired capital stock considers at a different aspect of the evolution of the gap between the long-run and the actual capital coefficient. That is, instead of seeking to measure a "normal" relationship between the capital stock and output, this other approach begins with an estimate of the output that would be produced by the "normal" use of the capital stock, referred to as the "potential output".
The ratio of the actual output to the potential output is referred to in turn as the "utilization rate". In the above exercise, a utilization rate above I corresponds to a capital coefficient below the trend line, and vice versa.
Figure V3 suggests that in Japan there has been a close relationship between changes in the utilization rate and investment. Actually, the relationship as depicted in the figure does not assume an instantaneous reaction of investment to changes in utilization, as the figure's utilization data are averages of the utilization rates in each of the four quarters before the quarter shown.
This result suggests that when Japanese enterprises observe that their capacity utilization rates are rising and remaining high they then invest in expanding capacity. By the same token, when they observe that the utilization rate is falling, they cut back on investment.
This exercise suggests, in other words, that the investment boom in the late 1980s and the following slow-down in the 1990s may have been mainly the result of enterprise responses to rapid demand expansion in the late 1980s and the sluggish demand conditions in the early 1990s. In this view, entrepreneurs in Japan undertook investment according to conventional business plans. The strong investment exhibited in figure VI cannot then be seen as some sort of unexplained investment frenzy (at least according to the above analysis).
Unusual dinlensions of recent investment behaviour Something unusual could be detected, however, in the last cycle of rising and then falling investment. The Economic Planning Agency of Japan (EPA)
has looked at changes over time in the rate of return on real assets in the manufacturing sector taken as a whole.4 The Agency found a relatively simple relationship that seemed to be able to explain (at least until the end of the 1980s)
changes in the rate of return. Thus, figure V4 shows actual rates of return in manufacturing from 1973 to 1988 and the rates of return given by an econometric equation based largely on the capacity utilization rate. 5 Beginning in 1989, however, the relationship no longer held. The actual rate of return was markedly less than expected based on extrapolating the relationship of the earlier period into the later period.
An explanation for the behaviour of the rate of return on real assets since 1989 is somewhat elusive. The predicted time path of the rate of return takes account of the effect of the recession and in this sense the parallel falling lines in 1991 and 1992 suggest that the historical relationship still has considerable predictive power. However, something happened in 1989 and 1990 that the model did not pick up - something that reduced the profitability of manufacturing operations. It was not the exchange rate of the yen 00, whose appreciation did not begin until 1991 and was strongest in 1993; indeed, the real effective exchange rate of the yen depreciated in 1989 and 1990 (see annex table A.9), and this increased the competitiveness of the tradable goods sector.
What had thus changed in the operations of Japanese enterprise? In particular, might the investment plans of the late 1980s have been chosen less prudently than in earlier years? Japanese firms had grown rapidly in the 1980s.
The fact that the average number of subsidiaries owned by a parent company increased from 67 in 1987 to 81 in fiscal 1990, and to 88 in fiscal 1992, suggests that Japanese companies might have overstretched their business operations and been consequently led into unfamiliar and unprofitable fields of business. In short, while the quantity of investment in the late 1980s did not seem to go beyond what might have been expected based on the growth of demand, the "quality" of investments might have deteriorated.
The one factor that needs to be introduced into the discussion at this point is the financial "bubble" that developed in Japan in the late 1980s and burst in the early 1990s, causing great disruption of financial markets and the banking system. Figure 4 indicates the dimensions of the bubble. Through the 1970s and the first half of the 1980s, the growth of financial assets and liabilities in Japan essentially kept pace with the growth of nominal CDP. Thus, the ratios of assets and liabilities to CDP were relatively constant. Then, however, the speculative buying of equity shares and real estate exploded.
Share prices had risen strongly on the stock markets of the major economies in the 1980s and most were thought to be overvalued before they underwent a sharp contraction in October 1987; the Japanese market correction was smaller than in other cases, however, even though the estimated degree of overvaluation was substantially greater." Nevertheless, the Japanese contraction was only delayed and once finally begun, was truly an economic shock.
It was estimated that the gains in stock value in 1987 alone had been equivalent to about SO per cent of nominal CDP. By the end of 1990, the total value of real and financial assets reached almost three times the 1980 level. The losses in stock values after the fall were correspondingly high and amounted to a value that was equivalent to 38 per cent of CDP in 1992.7 Debt also rose relative to its past relationship to nominal CDP, as figure y'S
indicates, even if not nearly as much as assets. The quality of borrowing, however, may have changed. Borrowing became relatively easy to arrange in the speculative environment. Indeed, Japanese firms became large issuers of bonds with equity warrants, wherein the interest rates on the bonds were relatively low because the buyer had an option to convert the bond into equity shares in a rising market.
Even straight borrowing became easier. Borrowers had to put up collateral against the possibility that they would not be able to service their loans. With asset prices high, companies had more value in their holdings of shares in other companies or in landholdings to pledge as collateral. At the same time, banks saw the risk of default - or more precisely, the possible consequences of default, given the collateral - as being low and they tended to charge lower interest spreads over their costs in the competition to arrange more loans.
Indeed, as the value of bank reserves - these included stocks valued at rising market prices - and deposits rose, loan officers of banks were under pressure to expand their lending.
This was the environment in which firms sought borrowing in support of their efforts to expand plant and equipment capacity. It is easy to believe that loan officers in banks might have made less rigorous assessments of projects than were warranted. In short, during the financial bubble period, firms could have become more aggressive risk takers.
In any event, when the crash and recession came more or less on top of each other, the market value of collateral on loans evaporated and then profits from operations disappeared. First, stock prices collapsed, followed by land prices, and together these collapses had a devastating effect on corporate balance sheets. Those assets that firms held in the form of shares in other companies and land lost much of their value, while their obligations to their creditors both bank borrowing and financial market obligations, such as commercial paper - did not.
The implication of these developments for the capacity of firms to finance investment was a straightforward one: such capacity was reduced sharply.
First, the fact that, in order to improve its weakened balance sheet position, a firm might use its current profits to repay its creditors would reduce its internal funds for investment. Second, firms were constrained in terms of obtaining outside finance. There are two main channels for such funds. One channel is new borrowing, whether from banks or the market, which further increases company liabilities, while declining creditworthiness pushes up the cost of new borrowing.
The other channel is an equity issue. Firms however, are generally reluctant to create new equity shares when the market is depressed and more shares have to be issued in order to raise a given amount of new funds. The chief reason is that the larger the number of new shares issued, the more the equity stake of the existing shareholders is diluted.
Econometric studies by the Economic Planning Agency confirmed the negative effects of the worsening of balance sheets on investment. Although balance sheet deterioration was found to reduce investment in both the manufacturing and the non-manufacturing sectors, the negative effect was greater in the non-manufacturing sector. This was the case for both debt-position and land-value indicators.
In past cycles, investment in the non-manufacturing sector recovered more quickly than that in other sectors and became the main engine of overall investment activities. The need to undergo balance sheet adjustment may have been one reason that the recession was so prolonged in Japan.
The sharp decline in asset prices has also negatively affected financial institutions, the major suppliers of investment finance in Japan. 9 For them, the collapse of asset prices not only wiped out the earlier capital gains on their stock and land holdings, but also increased the amount of "bad loans", that is, loans that the borrowers could not fully service. Loans are the basic assets in a bank's balance sheet and the accumulation of bad loans requires a bank to either set aside additional reserves against non-payment or reduce the reported value of the loans on its books, with either course of action reducing the value of its assets. At the end of September 1995, the total amount of bad loans among all the Japanese commercial and trust banks was ¥37 trillion, almost 8 per cent of GDP. A deterioration in its balance sheet weakens a bank's ability to make loans.
When asset prices continued to decline, banks became even more cautious about making loans because the future value of the collateral had become uncertain. At the same time, banks may have become more stringent when assessing investment projects proposed by borrowers. The annual growth rate of total private financing (non-bank borrowing, bonds and commercial paper)
and borrowing from commercial banks declined substantially in the 1990s. It is difficult to identify the extent to which banks' inability to lend had the effect of squeezing demand for investment financing. However, the fact that bank lending grew more rapidly than total private financing in the boom years of the late 1980s and then contracted more rapidly in the early 1990s suggests that the inability to lend did have such an effect.

As Japan moves more solidly, if still slowly, into the recovery phase of its current business cycle, private investment is expected to strengthen. Indeed, the 2 per cent growth of GDP forecast in this Survey for Japan in 1996 embodies an expansion of real, private, non-residential investment of 33 per cent.
With the yen's having appreciated 27 per cent since 1990 in real effective terms (see annex. table A.9), a substantial portion of this investment should shift into the non-tradables sector, and this would in any case help Japan reduce its persistent balance-of-trade surplus.. However, what seems to be occurring, based admittedly on indirect indicators, is that investment in non-tradables is lagging.
In other words, while investment in manufacturing has begun to rise, that in the non-manufacturing sector (mainly services) has been less strong. Moreover, the investment in manufacturing seems to be responding to price signals from the exchange-rate appreciation in that investment has been relatively buoyant in technology-intensive fields, such as semiconductors, personal computers and communications technologies. Investment in more standardized products, such as steel, non-ferrous metals and textiles, has been plunging.ll In the technology intensive sectors, Japanese exports have to compete on the basis not so much of price (such competition is made difficult by the appreciation of the yen) as of product and process innovation.
The question, then, is why investment has not also shifted into non-tradabIes.
One reason may have to do with balance sheet developments of firms in the manufacturing sector versus the non-manufacturing sector. The latter seem to have made their balance sheet adjustments relatively more slowly, in part because they have had more of their assets tied up in landholdings than manufacturing firms and land prices have continued to fall. That is, despite a moderate rebound of stock prices in late 1995 and their stability thereafter, land prices have continued to be weak. In February 1996, for example, 95 per cent ofland prices designated for commercial usage in the threelargest metropolitan areas in Japan (Tokyo, Osaka and Nagoya) were still falling. 12 This argument should apply, however, only in the short run, as manufacturing firms that had strengthened their balance sheets might be expected at some point to diversify into non-tradables if the profit possibilities were sufficiently attractive.
There is another argument, however, namely, that profits in the non-tradabIes sector have perhaps been relatively weak. Indeed, profit rates in the nontradable sector have been consistently below those in the manufacturing sector, and the fact that the gap between the two sectors widened after mid-1993, was thought to have dragged down investment in the non-manufacturing sector.
One element connected with this may have been the relatively weak productivity growth registered by the non-manufacturing sector. During the period 1975-1990, labour productivity of the manufacturing sector more than doubled.
Over the same period, however, the financial industry increased its productivity by only 35 per cent and the transportation and communications industry by less than 34 per cent. There is, though, anecdotal evidence that the non-tradables sector, particularly wholesale and retail distribution, and banking and insurance services, has recently accelerated its computer and communications related investment to improve productivity and raise profitability.
However, these computer and communications-driven productivity increases may take some time to manifest themselves. The introduction of computers and communications-related technologies requires a measure of reorganization of management structures, and could result in workers' becoming redundant.
This would conflict with Japanese industry's lifetime employment principle which may be declining in importance, but still remains strong. 14 The final question, then, is whether policy measures might raise the rate of investment in thenon-tradables sector of Japan. The massive public investment programme being implemented by the Government of Japan as part of its anti-recessionary fiscal package certainly contributes directly to investment in this sector; but it does not seem that the regional and sectoral allocation of public funds was aimed particularly at encouraging or supporting private investment in non-tradables. Furthermore, the Government can only pursue such an expansionary fiscal policy for a limited period owing to increasing public deficits now and - given burgeoning future social security commitments - in the future.
The deregulation of the services sector, however, can be an important element of a policy to foster investment in non-tradables. The services sector accounts for about 70 per cent of Japan's GDP. Stimulating competition and thereby increasing productivity in this sector are an essential element in raising the long-run potential output of the country as a whole. In fact, the Government is now in the second year of a three-year economic deregulation programme running to April 1998, and covering about 1,800 points of regulation.
The programme covers all the major services industries, from banking and insurance to retail and wholesale industries; but so far it has only tackled minor technical measures and has not yet produced visible improvement in investment in the services sector.
In dealing, however, with one specific component of the non-tradables sector, namely, the bankrupt jusen, or housing loan companies, the Government has had to take a more active role. The fiscal 1996 budget contained a public rescue plan which was approved by the Japanese parliament in April 1996, but it is still unclear how and to what extent the monetary and legal authorities will resolve the mounting debts owned by the jusen.
In conclusion, what seems clear from this analysis, is that the financial structure that had developed in Japan under the influence of the market, policy, history and social structure revealed, during the "bubble economy"
episode, serious weaknesses having macroeconomic as well as sectoral consequences.
That financial structure had once helped Japan to become the highincome and internationally competitive exporter of sophisticated manufactures that it is today. Few would dispute, however, that by the early 1990s it was in need of major reforms.

There is a wide range of opinion on how intensively government should seek to involve itself in the financial sector. A rather sceptical view, reflecting one strain of opinion that has been influential in terms of the advice proffered to developing countries, can be stated succinctly: "Government intervention in a country's financial sector takes many forms, some benign, some debilitating."'5 Clearly, when Governments act in the financial arena, they intend their policies to be more than merely benign.
It is clear, in any event, that the banking system and financial markets of a country do not make up just another industry, like steel or computer software development. The banking system is responsible for almost all economic payments and originates most of the money circulating in an economy. When the banking system is not sound - or is perceived not to be sound - it can severely disrupt the economy.Governments thus rarely hesitate to limit entry into banking by requiring that banks be licensed. Government policy is generally to supervise banks closely (which supervision mayor may not in fact be carried out). Governments also seek to build confidence in the safety of funds placed with banks through government-sponsored deposit insurance.
Besides ensuring the smooth operation of the monetary and financial system, Governments typically also take a growth and development perspective and sometimes an income-distribution or equity perspective concerning the financial sector. That is, Governments typically look to the financial sector as a tool for carrying out policy meant to guide and bolster the flow of investment in the economy. Sometimes Governments participate directly in the financial sector through government-owned financial institutions and sometimes they foster the development of particular financial markets or institutions (the policy to develop a venture capital system in the Republic of Korea is a case in point, as discussed in box V.l). Frequently, however, Governments seek to influence the resource allocation decisions of the private financial sector by altering the credit allocation decisions of banks.
Commentators on policy do not have a common position on whether, or how, Governments should intervene in credit markets, but the fact is that most Governments do so. The intervention can of course take any of several forms.
Instruments include subsidized credit, government loan guarantees, special tax treatment of income from loans and other incentives.
The Governments of most developing economies influence credit allocation to one degree or another. Developed countries like Canada, France, Germany and the United States of America have used directed credit programmes at some point in time. It has been suggested that government intervention in credit allocation was responsible for the success of several economies on the Pacific Rim, particularly Japan and the Republic of Korea. Most countries, however, cannot boast of the same prowess, despite an abundance of allocation schemes.
In transition economies, the issue is rather delicate, given their objective of moving away from state control. Yet should the State withdraw from capital markets before the completion of enterprise privatization and of banking reform? The Russian Federation and Poland, for example, chose the credit allocation route, whereas the Czech Republic did not (see chap. VI).
The goals of developed and developing countries, in terms of directing credit, generally differ. In developed countries, these programmes are today more often than not tools of social policy or regional development. In developing countries, they have also been used as broader industrial policy tools to achieve higher growth of GDP, A traditional growth-oriented argument for government involvement in the financial system begins with the observation that the State would raise the growth of output to a more desired level if it encouraged more long-term investment.
The view is that if people decided to act collectively rather than individually, they would invest more for the benefit of their own generation and future generations. (In other words the social "rate of discount" is lower than the individual one.) The State could thus assist in situations where long-term finance was warranted but creditors were unwilling to put their resources at risk for long enough periods except at forbidding rates of interest. State guarantees (or borrowing by the State itself) are a common mechanism for extending the maximum maturity of private credits.
Another argument, however, extends its scope beyond the lengthening of maturities to affirm that the State is also needed to help guide credit in specifically desired directions in so far as financial markets are inherently imperfect.
Not only do financial institutions commonly have a significant measure of monopoly power, but there is a fundamental asymmetry and incompleteness in the information available to potential lenders about the intentions and capacities of borrowers. The asymmetry is of course a matter of degree, depending on the sector and the type of finance. In any event, it is argued that Governments can help overcome the reluctance of financial institutions to place funds in the "right" places.
A prime example concerns the financing of investments in new industries.
The first financial backer of an innovator bears greater uncertainty than later lenders who can "free ride" on the information gained from the first loans. The expected rewards of lending to the innovator have to be great enough to overcome the· greater uncertainty, or the costs of the uncertainty might be lowered by policy. An extreme case of this "initial bank" problem has affected the transition economies. As discussed in chapter VI, banks have been reluctant to lend to new firms (or even old firms) operating in the new market economies.
In situations where the State largely withdrew from supplying finance, the credit crunch has been severe.
At the opposite end of the spectrum from the financing of little-known innovators are the government restrictions that require financial institutions to place a percentage of their resources in credits to the government that is beyond what can be justified on a prudential basis. In other words, one of the biggest abuses of central credit direction occurs when it becomes a "low-cost"
means offinancing the public sector deficit. As these funds would otherwise be lent to the private sector, this constitutes a case of the public sector literally "crowding out" the private.
Directed credit programmes can also be subject to private sector abuse. If privileged borrowers do not themselves have the highest marginal returns on investment, there will be arbitrage incentives to on-lend the resources to more profitable uses. This was the case, for example, in Greece, where the obligatory investment ratios of banks provided incentives for "round tripping" of funds.
Industrial arid agricultural firms that had access to earmarked credit obtained the credit and lent it to other firms that had higher rates of return but were not eligible under the Government's schemes. Until 1985, 75 per cent of all commercial bank deposits in Greece were earmarked. The privileged sectors included the public sector, which garnered nearly 50 per cent of the deposits, and industrial and small-scale firms, which obtained another 25 per cent. Not until 1993 were these allocations significantly reduced as part of a reform begun in 1987.
Avoiding abuses has required rigorous monitoring of directed credit programmes.
Indeed, the success of such schemes in Japan and the Republic of Korea has to some extent been attributed to their monitoring schemes. The Republic of Korea's "export-financing ceiling system" of 1976 based financing decisions on past export performance of potential borrowers. 21 Moreover, diversification of exports and the utilization of new export opportunities were rewarded as well. Mechanisms were also needed to convey information on performance and opportunities to and from the credit recipients and the decision makers. In the case of the Republic of Korea, the Ministry of Commerce and Industry set up monthly meetings attended by senior policy makers and leading businesses.
Another consideration separating successful directed credit programmes from less successful ones is how well defined the targets of the programmes are. The Republic of Korea again provides an instructive example. 22 Between 1961 and the mid-1970s, export-oriented sectors had been targeted and high growth achieved; but over time the number of sectors that were targeted grew and economic growth became increasingly unbalanced. In this case, emphasis on large firms tended to accentuate the power of conglomerates (chaebols). This ultimately led to a redirection of credit to small borrowers as well as an effort to try to develop a venture capital sector (see box V.l).
Pollution of objectives of directed credit programmes by political factors is yet another danger. The Republic of Korea contained this problem by granting the credit on a non-discretionary basis. All export-oriented firms that were successful were automatically granted credit, and political discretion could not mar this targeting. On the other hand, the power of large firms was bolstered by the programmes and it was not a simple step, politically speaking, to restructure the programmes. In some other countries, the situation was more difficult, government allocation being rife with abuse: credit was largely provided on a discretionary basis and specification of priority recipients was vague.
A set of institutions have evolved in the United States of America for promoting innovations through the creation of new enterprises. These institutions, known as "venture capital" companies, have played a part in the creation of some of the most famous names in the United States computer industry, including Apple, AST, Compaq, Digital Equipment, Intel and Seagate. The venture capital system in the United States was not designed by policy makers, but arose as a market-based phenomenon. In other countries (the Republic of Korea being a case in point), Governments have sought through policy to emulate the function carried out by the United States system, especially given how much importance, for innovation and competition and thus for economic progress, independent new firms are viewed as having.
The core institution in the venture capital system of the United States is the venture capital partnership or fund.· It consists of a small group of entrepreneurs, often with engineering and management backgrounds, who come together to search for start-up investment opportunities. These "general partners" invest in new firms, taking an equity stake (usually amajority of shares) and actively participating in the management of the new firm.
Actually, the general partners conventionally put up only about1 per cent of the money they invest. The rest is supplied by "limited partners", usually institutional investors, who take a more passive role. The limited partners pay an annual management fee (amounting to a small percentage of the assets invested) to the general partners and also agree that when the partnership is wound up they will take, typically, only 80 per cent of the value to which their original funds have grown.
The goal of the venture fund is to participate actively in new firms and help them grow, but only for a limited number of years, after which time the venture fund exits from an ownership and management role. A common feature of the exit is the firm's "going public" through an initial public offering of shares that will then be traded on the large over-the-counter market that exists in the United States for small company stocks. The firm might also be acquired by another firm through a merger or a leveraged buyout.
As the value of aventure enterprise grows, so does the value of the partners' original investments. Of course, many - actually, most - of the new firms fail. Finally, after a time, the partners wind up the venture partnership itself and divide up the value of their holdings, which, if successful. will be many times greater than the original funds.
The system in the United States has been supported by government policies, including military procurement and support of applied research. It has also benefited from state and local policy packages to lure and nurture innovative firms and federal policies to promote small business, through, for example, the Small Business Administration, which, inter alia, lends to small business investment companies for on-lending to small enterprises.
Investment incentives were also created under the Small Business Innovation Development Act of 1982,b not to mention such broad tax and related incentives, as stem from the relatively low rates of taxation of capital gains in the United States income tax system.
However, the dynamism of the United States venture capital system seems mostly related to the mode of operation of the economy of the United States. The relevant main dimensions seem to include a high level of technological sophistication, allowing for ready development of products that embody new technologies; a large domestic market with high purchasing power, allowing for rapid growth of sales within a short period of time; a well-developed set of financial markets, smoothly providing funds for relatively small companies as well as large firms; and a skilled labour market from which the human resources for new companies can be garnered. In addition, the social environment values inventive entrepreneurship highly and there is strong legal protection for intellectual property.
Venture capital in the Republic of Korea, in contrast, has been much more of a public initiative: Indeed, it was initiated in part as a response to the growth - even the dominance - of large corporations that it was felt had become too big and unwieldy to adapt adequately to the rapidly changing market situations of today. The Government of the Republic of Korea thus decided to encourage the establishment of many small and medium sized companies, especially in the technology-intensive industries. Essential to achieving this goal would be the mobilization of considerable amounts of financial resources for venture capital.
Thus, in 1986, the Government began a policy to promote venture capital through incentives for the establishment of venture capital companies. From 15 such companies in 1986 providing $330 million in loans and investments, the sector grew to 55 companies in 1995. Total financing provided in 1995 came to $41 billion.
The system of the Republic of Korea embodies two types of venture companies: one to provide start-up financing of small and medium-sized companies (that is to say, those with 300 or fewer employees) and another to provide expansion financing after start-up.
Applicants wishing to establish venture companies for start-up enterprises, called "small business creation investment companies" (SCICs), first register with the Ministry of Trade and Industry. They then become eligible for subsidized long-term loans from the Government, through its Start-up Promotion Fund, to be utilized in investment in new companies. qhe limited partnership arrangement is also utilized to tap corporate pension funds and insurance companies for resources to invest in new ventures; indeed, within five years the SCICs must invest more than the amount that they received in government funding. The SCICs provide consulting services as well as funds for the new enterprises.
Their role is limited, however, to starting enterprises and they must exit from the individual firms in their portfolio within seven years.
For the enterprises that survive, post-SCIC financing and assistance are available from institutions of the second type, the "new technology business finance corporations"
(TBFCs). These are non-banking financial institutions, licensed by the Ministry of Finance and Economy, that are empowered to invest, lend, lease or provide factoring services for nevv technology businesses. To be eligible to receive support from the TBFCs, firms have to have fewer than 1,000 employees and less than $40 million in assets. The government role in financing the TBFCs is mainly through the Technology Credit Guarantee Fund, which guarantees borrowings of TBFCs from financial institutions. The TBFCs, like the SCICs, also draw on limited partnership arrangements; also like the SCICs, the TBFCs provide management consulting services.
The system of the Republic of Korea has not been without problems. Some arise from the dual-institution system, as well as from the thin "over-the-counter" market for new equity listings and the complexities involved in gaining listings on the main stock exchange. However, there is also thought to be an insufficient institutional culture for venture capital and too few experts available to serve as consultants for venture companies.
In particular, business people of the Republic of Korea traditionally tend to be reluctant to run their businesses together on aCd-ownership basis. Indeed, the owners of venture businesses are said to regard venture capital companies only as fund-supplying institutions and not as partners.
In 1995, the Government further strengthened its policies to encourage the venture capital industry so that more than 10,000 start-ups can be established every year. The Government is expanding its funding for venture capital and also is seeking to develop the over-the-counter market. In addition, the Government is strengthening the legal protection of intellectual property rights and developing the patent system.
Eventually, the Government's aim in this sector is to make itself unnecessary. That is to say, the policy will be considered a success when venture capital companies emerge from dependence on the Government, cultivate their own expertise, find promising investment prospects and support them effectively. The Republic of Korea's approach to the development of a venture capital sector is, in other words, in the nature of an "infant industry" approach to financial development, which is a far cry from the ever-present financial role that the Government and many other governments elsewhere assumed over the years in fostering and channelling investment.
Another lesson derives from the fact that some countries have used credit allocation with more restraint than others. In Japan, for example, it was only one of many policy instruments. Moreover, there was more restraint as regards the degree to which credit was directed, in terms both of amounts and of specification of firms, than in most developing countries.Even in the 1950s, directed credit in the industrial sector formed less than 5 per cent of total funding of the sector; by 1980, this figure had declined to less than 1 per cent.
In the machine tool industry at least, directed credit was provided to a firm only once and lasted for a brief period.At the other end of the spectrum, around 50 per cent of funds in the Indian financial system have been subject to statutory reserve or priority credit requirements and the Government directed more than 70 per cent of the resources of the Indian commercial banks.
A final consideration is that the use of directed credit presumes a closed capital market, where financial outflows can be controlled. That is, assuming that the result of a credit programme is a different allocation than the market would have chosen - which is the whole point of the programme - the returns to lenders who participate in the programme may be less than the earnings of non-participants. Then, either the Government will make up the difference to the participating lenders through a subsidy or they (but more likely their depositors) will seek to evade the programme through capital outflows.
With financial markets being increasingly globalized, the viability of prolonged central credit allocation would seem to be in question. This does not mean that programmes will not work, only that maintaining them may be difficult if at the same time there is pressure to liberalize the capital account. In any case, it is a good working hypothesis that any large policy-induced distortion will ultimately be evaded.
In sum, experiences under a variety of directed credit programmes suggest that those programmes can indeed achieve their intended goals, at least for a certain time and under certain conditions. When they work well, they seem to be part of an array of tools that a government employs, as other factors are required in combination with direction of credit for such mechanisms to be successful.
In the case of the export promotion policy of the Republic of Korea, for example, directed credit was combined with monitoring of the exchange rate to maintain the competitiveness of exports, and domestic price controls were limited so that domestic price distortions would not be widespread. Indeed, as the chapters that follow will demonstrate, the most striking feature in this regard is the multiplicity of policy considerations affecting investment performance.
As the countries in transition move from the centrally planned economic model to a market-driven model of economic organization, they fully expect that a new capital stock will be created to enable them to generate wealth by producing goods that their citizens - and foreign purchasers - might actually wish to buy. Investment is central to reaching this goal and has been an increasing focus of attention internationally. It is also our focus in the present chapter.
First to be reviewed will be the investment experiences of a number of Central and Eastern European countries, then those of the Treuhandanstalt (the German privatization agency) in what are now the eastern Lander (States) of Germany, and finally those of the Russian Federation. The survey is selective, in that the required data are not available for all countries in transition, especially in the Russian Federation's partners in the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS). However, conclusions may be drawn based on the diversity of country studies that could be prepared.
The economic transition is the second economic revolution in these countries in the twentieth century. The first change was from a market economy to a centrally planned one. This took place in the case of the former Soviet Union after 1917, and in the other countries after 1945. To be able to fully appreciate the difficulties and opportunities that these countries are encountering in making the new transition and the role of investment in the transition, it is useful to go back to what their previous leaders thought the results of the earlier change would be, what they were initially and why the eventual results differed so markedly from expectations.
At the risk of simplification, it can be said that central planning was based upon the concept of economic progress as entailing the production of physical "things" - ships, railways, wheat, clothing. The total value produced in an economy in one year was the sum of the things produced. Services - such as legal services and distribution - were needed too, but they were a charge against the value of production and not production itself; they were thus non-productive.!
Once central planning was adopted as the means to organize production, this perspective determined not only what economists studied and wrote about, but also what was in fact produced. Thus, after 1927, a prime objective of the Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR) was to use its natural resources and vast supplies of labour to fully industrialize its economy in a way that had never been attempted before - through systematic and concerted planning. A very large proportion of current investment was put into producing more investment goods - in Lenin's words, "using capital to produce capital" - so that production - at least the production of material goods - could be further increased.
The system appeared to have achieved its goal. Table VLl gives figures for pig iron production which was once an important determinant of a country's power and wealth: machines, railways and so on were constructed out of iron.
On the eve of the First World War, Russian production, which had expanded rapidly since the turn of the century, was slightly behind that of France and considerably behind that of Germany. By the start of the Second World War, the Soviet Union's production was only slightly behind that of Germany. Whereas 1939 production levels in France, Germany and the United States of America were not much above their 1913 levels, and the level of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was even lower, the Soviet Union had expanded production dramatically over the period. Although the human costs involved were enormous, the Soviet Union appeared to have devised a system that could ensure growth irrespective of what occurred in the rest of the world, which had not yet emerged from the Great Depression. After the Second World War, further production increases were achieved and by 1970, the Soviet Union was drawing level to the United States in pig iron production.
Centrally allocated and directed investment programmes had thus proved effective for rapid industrialization in selected sectors, as well as for industry retooling for war needs, after-war reconstruction and nuclear arms and space programmes. Yet, as the post-war era went on, faults began to be perceived in the capital accumulation model on which the industrial success of central planning had been based. It became increasingly apparent that a model that catered not directly to consumer demand, but rather to what planners thought consumer demand would be over the planning period - and one that also relied upon the central authorities to direct research - was failing to keep abreast of technological developments in the world at large. One sign of how the Soviet Union had remained wedded to a model that did not fit the period is that from 1970 to 1990, pig iron production shrank in the developed countries, particularly the United States, while it increased in the Soviet Union. In 1990, Soviet production was double that of the United States. That statistic was a sign less of success than of something's being wrong.
The investment process The reasons that the planning model became discredited can help explain why relatively little value was placed on the capital stock held by the centrally planned economies when they began their transition to market economies.
Capital accumulation (investment) was centrally determined. 2 In its original form, neither meaningful prices, interest rates nor profit was considered in the decision on which sectors would gain which assets. Decision makers focused on physical production capacities and engineering relationships at the microeconomic level and political and socio-economic dimensions at the level of overall accumulation. The model was based on the continuous growth of all factor inputs, including stocks and fixed capital assets. This strategy is often referred to as the "extensive path" of economic growth. 3 A supposed advantage of the central planning model was that, as accumulation was planned over a multi-year horizon, it would be much more stable from year to year than was normally the case in market economies. 4 It was also thought that investment would be greater than under a market system and so would enable such long-run objectives as industrialization, defence preparedness and a high rate of economic growth to be reached. The proportion of net material product (NMP) devoted to net accumulation was usually fixed within the range of 20-30 per cent. 5 In the 1960s, central planners emphasized investment, even at the expense of the growth of consumption. In the 1970s, the picture changed: accumulation was slower than the growth of income and consumption growth was stronger than accumulation, except in the former Czechoslovakia (see table VI.2). Foreign borrowing in the 1970s helped boost consumption and made available imported consumption goods that were of a much higher quality than those produced by domestic industries. In the 1980s, in Hungary and Poland, accumulation actually declined in order to allow growth in consumption and in the exports needed to service foreign debt at a time when income growth had decelerated sharply. By the late 1980s, the fact was inescapable that earlier sacrifices in consumption had been followed by slower - not faster - output growth and that consumption demand could not be satisfied. The central planning model had been totally discredited.
That model had assumed that planners would be able to judge in advance the future requirements of the consumer market, decide the best technical means of producing the output required, construct the machines to produce it, and then actually enter into production. This method worked rather well with the production of a fairly homogeneous and simple good like pig iron, yet it could not anticipate the vast array of goods required to satisfy the increasingly varied and changing consumer demand of competitive market economies.
The flexibility of production that could be observed in private enterprises was lacking in the centrally planned economies. Indeed, the centrally planned system used production processes that usually were out of date compared with those of the advanced market economies even at the moment production began, and enterprises in the planned economies were thus always striving to catch up. The difficulties encountered by the centrally planned system in producing goods of quality standards comparable with those of the developed economies were underlined by the differences between the products of the former German Democratic Republic and those of the former Federal Republic of Germany.6 These products came from the two parts of what was before the Second World War a single country whose different regions had not been at markedly different levels of technological development.
Not only did the system result in much investment's going to produce increasingly obsolete products, but there was also an almost constant pressure to increase investment. If the expected output growth did not materialize, the remedy entailed not a re-examination of investment programmes in terms of their feasibility and efficiency, but rather another series of "organizational measures", such as decisions to concentrate resources on near-completed facilities so as to bring down the volume of overdue unfinished construction, or to improve management discipline. The result inevitably was to allot more to investment because the plan always stipulated increased volumes of production and construction.
Another upward pressure stemmed from the fact that leaders at all levels of the bureaucracy considered that their power and prestige grew in accordance with the expansion of the unit that they led. Their financial rewards also increased accordingly in many cases. In addition, the difficulties encountered by company management in obtaining its own inputs prompted management to produce these inputs within the firm or branch, which again required investment.
In this way, state enterprises became conglomerates, establishing various technologically unrelated divisions such as Construction, Machinery Maintenance, Instruments and Transport. It was safer, even if more costly, to ensure that various renovations, repairs and other activities unrelated to a given enterprise's profile were implemented in-house.7 The fact that the costs of investments were always paid from the state budget eliminated any financial consequences to the enterprises of failed investments.
8 There was little resistance to political pressure for more expansion and this forced planners to increase the volume of investments even more. Thus, plan targets for accumulation were overly ambitious in light of the limitedness of the real resources needed for their fulfilment. Meanwhile, the supply of materials, machinery and equipment did not meet needs, causing serious bottlenecks in the domestic economy with important external effects, as rising imports raised trade deficits to unsustainable levels.9 Investment was thus pushed up at much faster rates than national income. As summed up by enterprises and departments, relying on the experience of the previous extensive development, demanded the greatest possible volume of investments, the most manpower and the lowest production targets they could, so as to fulfil the plans easily. As a result, the incremental capital-output ratio rose sharply. By almost any measure, these economies were not efficient.
However, the central planning model did change over time as its defects became more apparent. Indexes of investment efficiency were worked out to aid planners and enterprises in selecting the most "effective" investment projects.
With progress made in the mathematics of optimal planning and computerization, planners hoped to achieve a more appropriate allocation of investment resources. The role and responsibilities of investment banks (in some reforming countries, commercial banks) were strengthened so that they would systematically evaluate investment efficiency before extending credits.
In addition, the planned economies embarked on a consistent policy of standardization of capital equipment and processes, systematic exchanges of technological data and specialization among the USSR and the countries that were its partners in the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CMEA). "Capital charges", which were annual payments in lieu of interest that were made by enterprises to the State on fixed assets in their possession, were introduced. Profit became the main criterion for enterprise performance in several economies, meaning that enterprises were no longer as extravagant in terms of endeavouring to secure and hoard equipment that they could not utilize profitably. 11 Still, under a system of administered prices rather than of market-determined prices, distortions in these economies were abundant. It was almost impossible to deduce whether a given branch was really profitable for the national economy or not and it was therefore immensely difficult for the authorities to allocate investment resources according to their relative efficiency in different spheres. Not surprisingly, under such conditions, a good deal of highly inappropriate investment took place.
In the end, it proved impossible to reform the system. A considerable capital stock had been built up at considerable sacrifice; but while it could generate large physical volumes of output, it had proved unable to create the kind of living standards that the citizens of these countries expected to enjoy, which were enjoyed by citizens in many neighbouring countries. This was the legacy left to the economies in transition.

At the outset of the transition, enterprises in Central and Eastern European transition economies (CEETEs) faced the following conditions. First, there were immediate demands for modernization of the outdated economic structure described above. Second, new enterprise management and organizational forms had to be worked out. Third, rapid modernization of the product mix was called for. These requirements demanded a large volume of high-quality investments. Yet investment contracted and that made the situation worse:
much of the most necessary maintenance and replacement investment could not be implemented. The turnaround would not begin until some years later (see table VI.3). 

The early years of transition in Central and Eastern Europe were generally a time of economic and political uncertainty and macroeconomic instability. In all cases, not just investment but also consumption declined either in 1990 or in 1991. In some cases, investment fell by nearly 30 per cent in a single year (see table VI.3). All of the countries had to take emergency stabilization measures right after the start of the transition process.
Even in the early stage of the transition, however, there were warnings of the need to protect, at least temporarily, some of the infant or senile industries during the period of radical changes. It was feared that in the necessarily deep restructuring, CEETEs might lose irreversibly their potential comparative advantages in certain sectors.Yet the centrally planned system was so discredited that it was not politically feasible to adopt measures of state intervention.
The introduction of elements of industrial policy or protection of domestic production was out of the question.
While much of the capital stock was obsolete, some of the irreversible scrapping of capacities and closing of enterprises that took place might have been avoided had the domestic short-term conditions not deteriorated so rapidly.
Part of this reflected consumer demand, that is to say, sales of domestic products contracted sharply as imports became readily available. On the other hand, had the process of "constructive destruction" been slower than it was, it would have absorbed considerable resources (in maintaining activities that would never have become competitive) and thus delayed the transfer of resources into more promising lines of production. Indeed, one of the benefits of the sharp break was that some of the investments launched before the transformation according to very different economic policy goals were not completed, thereby freeing some resources for other uses.
External conditions during the early stages of transition were difficult for enterprises. The breaking up of the trade relations of the former CMEA was a major jolt to enterprises that lost well-established and assured markets; so was the new openness of CEETEs towards the global economy. Without any "filtering mechanism" to dampen the shock, these economies were extremely vulnerable to external changes.
On the other hand, openness to external trade and finance also offered benefits.
Newly attracted direct investment - and other foreign financing (indirectly)
- contributed to new domestic investment. This afforded the opportunity to tap the "productivity reserves" that had been locked up in the form of underutilized human capital and help close a technology and management gap.
Moreover, the skill and technology content of some CEETE production in traditional branches had been undervalued in domestic prices relative to international prices. As prices moved closer to international norms, potential returns to investment rose, making investment and its financing more attractive.
Another development in the shake-out of the early years that might, with hindsight, be seen in a positive light is that the CEETEs increased the writeoff rates of fixed assets that had suddenly become obsolete, thereby reducing the average age of equipment. Finally, in some countries, the decline in the average age of fixed assets was furthered by the pick-up in investment after 1993 which raised the share of fixed assets that were less than five years old.
Both these aspects - rapid scrapping and rapid replacement and modernization - have become integral parts of the current investment strategy.

After the "destructive phase" came the second task of modernization, namely to purchase machinery and equipment of the rriore advanced specifications demanded, which largely depended upon the availability of external resources.
When there was an easing of external constraints, imports of machinery and equipment increased. In the context of the large technological gap between the developed economies and the CEETEs, the increased import of machinery and equipment, which enables new processes or products to be substituted for technologically obsolete ones, may be seen as allowing productivity to rise even when only replacement investment takes place.
Evidence is accumulating of considerable productivity gains in CEETE
countries, as is shown in table VI.4. Countries have experienced annual increases of as much as 10 per cent, and often over 15 per cent, in labour productivity in a single year. The economies in transition had another advantage besides their abundant, but underexploited, human resources - a large stock of structures. As described above, output had been increased under the previous system primarily by expanding the number of productive units. Concentrating investment resources on the replacing of obsolete by more productive machinery in modernized albeit already existing structures, would increase output per worker. Table VI.5 shows that the share of machinery and equipment in total fixed capital investment increased strongly in the Czech Republic and Poland after 1990. Poland, which saw very fast increases in labour productivity after 1991, had started from a very low base of only about a third of investment being devoted to machinery and equipment; yet by 1995, its share was the largest among the countries examined.
There has also been a marked shift in the direction of investment in the years of transformation, as shown in table VI.6. In agriculture, the countries where the investment share was already small saw a further decline. However, Romania's much larger share fluctuated. The share of investment going to the extractive industries declined as expected, except in Poland where it was broadly stable. Investment in the extractive industry of Romania was higher than in the other countries, mainly owing to petroleum. As production declined substantially in Romania, largely because of demand factors, investment suf fered not only in this sector but also in the manufacturing branches producing equipment for the industry. In the other countries, there was no such abrupt change in the share of investment going to the manufacturing sector.
Table VI.6 also shows that large relative changes were seen in the construction, post and telecommunications, and finance branches. The increases in the construction sector point to the modernization that was needed for this sector to be able to refurbish existing buildings and erect structures to meet the higher standards now required. Two sectors that most urgently needed modernization were post and telecommunications, and finance. In all countries, the share of total investment going to the former sectors rose substantially. The banking sector had been neglected in the previous system, and the sharp increases in the low shares of investment in this sector in the cases of Poland and Romania reflect the rapid development of the modern banking system in these countries.
In the first destructive phase of the investment process described above, the demand for machinery and equipment of the standards required to produce for the market economy could only be - and were - supplied by imports.
Domestic suppliers have begun to succeed, however, in capturing a larger share of this market: in Hungary, domestic supplies of machinery grew by 18.5 per cent in 1993 and 7 per cent in 1994, while imports grew by 11 per cent in 1993 and declined by 9 per cent in 1994.16 Similarly, in the Czech Republic, the share of domestically produced equipment in total equipment purchases rose from 37 per cent in early 1993 to 43 per cent in 1994.
These encouraging developments at the sectoral level are being mirrored in a rise in investment at the macrolevel (see table VI.3). Investment growth in several countries, albeit not all, was strong in 1994, and it was positive in all the CEETE countries - and particularly strong in the Czech Republic, Poland and Romania - in 1995.
The privatization process and the growth of new private enterprises resulted in the increasing over the period of the share of private investment in total investment (see table VI. 7). Many of the new private enterprises are quite small, as the initial capital requirement for entry into the private sector can be quite low. 11 They can, however, subsequently reinvest a substantial portion of their profits.
Government (budgetary) investment has, in contrast, remained relatively weak, in line with the collapse of budgetary revenues. However, while there are certain measurement difficulties regarding the decline in government investment as a share of GDP since transition began, 18 the role of government-initiated investment seems poised to increase. The need for structural change is probably most intensely felt in the field of infrastructure - roads, telecommunications, educational and health infrastructure. As of the present, the emerging private sector does not have the necessary financial means to participate in these projects; moreover, far less foreign capital than anticipated has been attracted to major infrastructure projects. Future infrastructure development is therefore likely to depend heavily on the state budget. The average government investment/GDP ratio in the CEETEs was 5 per cent in 1995, only slightly above the average ratio of OECD in that year. 19 It may thus be expected to rise, owing to the backlog of public investment needs.
Table VI.7 also shows a decline in state-sector corporate (non-government)
investment as a percentage of GDP in many CEETEs after 1989. The main reason for the decline, apart from the severe recession of 1990-1993, was the transition itself. State-owned enterprises had no clear owners, and managers were left without incentives to invest. Even the future of the enterprises as such was uncertain. Managers yielded to wage pressures and used most income flows or even sold off machinery to pay for higher wages.

The policy environment in the CEETEs has clearly changed dramatically compared with what it was under central planning; but it took several years for the investment environment to improve and for enterprises to begin to respond.
The broad policy framework, however, was established rather early. In it, the government has a major role to play in nourishing the budding private and privatized sector. It also was expected to create structures conducive to entrepreneurial activity in the economy, including incentives for investors to channel their savings to enterprises and for enterprises to reinvest their own profits.
Governments were also expected to limit the absorption of resources by inflexible and inefficient State-owned enterprises. Implementing this vision was not, however, a straightforward matter.
It was widely understood that, for a sustainable growth of investment, domestic saving had to rise. The component under most direct government control is the government's own saving. In many countries, public saving turned negative as revenues evaporated, while current expenditures rose. The contraction of public saving had typically been translated into substantial increases in public deficits, despite the fact that public investment also fell in most countries. The only CEETEs that avoided this fiscal deterioration were the Czech Republic, Slovenia and the Baltic States.
Savings in CEETEs not only fell abruptly but also were allocated inefficiently.
The small part of saving that was not absorbed by the State was often channelled by a weak, non-competitive and largely State-controlled banking system into loss-making enterprises and sectors. Enterprises, in particular small and medium-sized enterprises, perforce relied heavily on the savings of their owners and on their own profits. External financing represented only a small fraction of total investment financing.
Put another way, the challenge was to make the banking sector play its proper role as a financial intermediary. Although the State hived off to new entities such as commercial banks some of the functions previously performed by the sole State-owned bank, it still retained substantial ownership of these bodies. These restructured banks inherited problems from the former system that impeded the banking system's ability to supply finance to a viable enterprise needing investment funds.
During the early years of transition, when both domestic and external markets collapsed, the State-owned enterprises (SOEs) were not able to generate funds to repay their loans to the banks. Subsidies from the State to the SOEs were also reduced. Thus, banks quickly became burdened with a portfolio of non-performing debt of SOEs. The banks in turn had little reason to refuse refinancing and new credits (or even to monitor the use of newly extended credit), as they assumed that they would eventually be repaid by the State.
This build-up of SOE debt to banks took place while monetary policy was tightened to counter the burst of inflation that accompanied the early stages of transition. The high interest rates that resulted raised even further the payments due to the banks.
The solution to the SOEs' incurring further non-performing loans was to privatize them, although this was not the only motive for privatization. However, they could be made attractive prospects for privatization only if part or all of their non-performing loans were not treated as obligations of the new owners.
This was facilitated by the fact that the banks were State-owned and so would not have insisted on repayment of the debts from the proceeds of privatization in the way that a privately owned bank would have.
Foreign direct investment (FOI) in the transition economies had started even before the transition began. Only Hungary, however, had accumulated asubstantial FDI stock by 1989, as a result of its reforms in the 1970s and 1980s. Since 1994, Hungary's head start seems to have faded as direct investment in both the Czech and Polish economies speeded up considerably. The dollar value of FDI inflows to CEETEs as awhole increased in each of the last six years (see table).
These growing FOI inflows seem to reflect a number of factors. First and foremost, investors' concerns about political stability in the r8gion seem to have eased. This is a major consideration for the many international companies that are seeking to spread their operations among emerging markets. Second, investors are seeing that these countries have achieved or are on the way to achieving macroeconomic stability. Third, with improving macroeconomic performance, the CEETE countries are enjoying an improvement in their credit ratings. Fourth, trade barriers between the CEETEs and other European States are coming down under the terms of the association agreements with the European Union and agreements among members of the Central European Free Trade Area. Under these two initiatives, the exports of some goods produced in the region are subject to lower import duties and in most parts of the continent are even exempt from them.
The strategies of the direct investors appear to be aimed at establishing a long-term presence in these countries. According to a survey of investments made by a sample of Western European companies in the countries of Eastern Europe, the main reasons for investing had to do more with the general desire to develop new markets in Central and Eastern Europe than with awish to obtain immediate profits or to exploit competitive positions arising from the specific features of those markets. 
About half of the accumulated FOI is concentrated in manufacturing, including engineering, automobile assembly, and the chemical industry. There have also been investments in services: for example, direct investors targeted the antiquated telecommunica~
tions system of the region, and this led to large individual agreements. One of the effects of the high share of FDI in manufacturing has been an increase in the role of joint ventures in the external trade of the countries concerned. 
In the beginning, FOI was mostly dir8cted towards those industries (and factories) that operated above the average technological productivity and efficiency level. The firms most in need of technological reconstruction and new management techniques were thus largely neglected by potential FDI partners. More recently, however, foreign investors have expressed interest in a broader array of industries. Part of this diversification can be attributed to the strategy of privatization, which gave foreign investors substantial new markets where domestic competitors were not present - as for instance, in telecommunications, where the monopoly public concern was privatized and foreign investors took an interest.
There have also been instances of FDI-related imports of new products rising while the domestic supply from the privatized enterprise in which foreign investors participated fell.
In spite of instances of anti competitive behaviour, the overall effect of FDI has been positive. While overall employment in the economies of the region increased only slightlyor declined - during the years of transition, that in FDI-related businesses increased substantially.
Companies with foreign participation have tended to invest actively, 0 and the performance of foreign-owned, especially wholly foreign-owned companies, in terms of per employee wages, net company income and value added, is superior to that of the average domestic enterprise.
The disruptions of the transition itself, with relative prices changing rapidly, made it very difficult for the often inexperienced managers of new and privatized companies to make accurate profit· forecasts, and so many of the loans that they incurred with the banks have not been repaid.
The result of all these factors is that the State-owned banking system is the least attractive sector of the economy in terms of privatizing and that only some forgiveness of the non-performing loans in the banks' portfolios can make them saleable prospects. For this reason, the banking sector was the last to be and in some countries has not yet been - privatized.
Meanwhile, the existing stock of non-performing loans makes the banks very reluctant to extend any further loans to viable enterprises. In addition, banks in transition economies have been hard-pressed in terms of assessing loan applications. They have expected their customers to provide effective guarantees in the form of real property and movables, cash, government securities, bank guarantees, and so forth. The experience of Hungary, moreover, was that after the development of bankruptcy procedures and the liquidation of a number of companies, creditworthy customers found it more difficult to obtain loans, even at high interest rates.
Such reform of the banking sector as can allow it to perform successful financial intermediation between savers and investors is of crucial importance.
Financial institutions matter for growth by not so much directly affecting the rate of capital formation, as evaluating, managing and funding the entrepreneurial activity that leads to growth.
In addition, neither domestic bond nor equity markets are significant alternative sources of funds, as the institutional structures of these markets are quite primitive and the information requirements for use of market finance are usually greater than for bank loans. The only alternative - and one that in fact imparts an advantageous access to credit - comprises foreign direct investment (see box VI.l) and cross-border borrowing, including from the parent company, and this has grown to sizeable proportions in the Czech Republic and Hungary.

Many of the difficulties encountered by the CEETEs in their first halfdecade of transition, in particular as regards investment, took a different form in the context of the reintegration of the German economy. In contrast with the case of the financially constrained transition economies, the German experience might be termed (with apologies to the ghost of W Arthur Lewis) "transition with unlimited supplies of finance".

From 2 July 1990, under the terms of the German Economic and Monetary Union, the two Germanies shared the deutsche mark as a common currency.
The economic integration of the two Germanies fused together a wealthy region, well endowed with both human and physical capital, with a relatively depressed region, albeit one rich in labour and land. In 1989, the population of the former German Democratic Republic (GDR) was 16 million, and that of the former Federal Republic of Germany (FRG) 62 million. Because the former GDR's capital was relatively outdated, as was its technology, labour productivity was much lower than that of the former FRG.
Although the east mark would have been worth considerably less than the deutsche mark in a truly fluctuating market for the east mark, price contracts, wage contracts and pension claims were converted at a rate of 1 east mark to 1 deutsche mark. 20 This was a political decision that would make it all the more difficult for eastern enterprises to become competitive. Wages in the former GDR had been well above the full employment, market-clearing level to begin with. Moreover, from the first quarter of 1990 to October 1990, average industrial wages per full-time worker rose by about 40 per cent. 21 The result was that labour in the eastern Lander was being paid much higher wages than was justified on the basis of a productivity comparison with the western Lander.
On 3 October 1990, the former GDR became constituent Lander of Germany.
As a result, practically all of the former FRG's laws and institutions were almost immediately applicable in the eastern Lander. These laws covered requirements in a variety of areas, such as workplace standards and environmental protection, that many of the existing enterprises in the eastern Lander could not possibly have met. Unlike the CEETEs, there was no "breathingspace"
in which laws and regulations could gradually be tightened to conform to the normally much higher standards prevailing in the European Union. Germany decided that, as one country, it could not have a second-class zone where the full protection of German laws did not apply. This was a political decision, but it had profound economic consequences.
Reunification also brought other unique developments. The eastern Lander acquired a new and well-developed institutional infrastructure and automatic access to developed country markets, thanks to Germany's position in the European Union and in the global economy. In contrast to the wage rate issue, these considerations made investment in the eastern Lander a relatively attractive proposition.
The Government also decided to privatize the State-run enterprises in the eastern Lander as rapidly as possible. 22 It entrusted the task to the Treuhandanstalt (Treuhand). The Treuhand had actually been founded on 1 March 1990 by the Government of the former GDR for the purpose of revitalizing its economy. To this end, all industrial enterprises in the GDR were transferred to it and it was charged with administering and preserving the State-owned assets of the GDR on a trust basis.
The former FRG entered the picture in mid-July 1990 at the time of the German Economic and Monetary Union. Against the background of the accelerating collapse of the centrally planned economic system of the GDR, the Treuhand was entrusted with a different legal mandate - namely, transforming the industrial sector of the former GDR command economy into a market-driven economy. This mandate was threefold: first, to privatize firms wherever possible;
second, to restructure companies where necessary to make them competitive and attractive to investors; third, to maintain employment in so far as this was compatible with the first two objectives. Following the formation of the German Economic and Monetary Union, the Treuhand's supervisory board was expanded to incorporate members from the FRG. With the dissolution of the GDR in October 1990, managerial control shifted decisively to the former FRG.
Headquartered in Berlin, the Treuhand's size peaked in 1992 with some 4,100 employees (roughly two-thirds of whom were citizens of the former GDR)
in 15 regional offices.

The Treuhand had a management structure similar to that of a German public company: a two-tier board consisting of a Management Board (Vorstand) and a Supervisory Board (Verwaltungsrat). The Supervisory Board consisted of 23 members.The Management Board, which was responsible for carrying out the Treuhand's daily affairs, consisted of nine members - eight individuals from the former FRG and one from the former GDR.
The Treuhand was provided with some DM 7 billion in start-up capital in June 1990 to "pre-finance" expected proceeds. This sum was supplemented by DM 10 billion the following year. It was expected initially that further revenues would be derived from privatization returns and borrowing. Through 1991, the Treuhand's annual limit on borrowing was DM 25 billion, a figure that was increased to DM 30 billion annually for 1992-1994. The Treuhand's deficit was DM 20 billion in 1991. By 1992, it was obvious that the Treuhand's revenues would cover no more than 38 per cent of its expenditures. The deficits increased steadily, and the Treuhand closed down operations on 30 December 1994. Its revenues from the sale of companies had amounted to DM 76 billion (approximately $47 billion), yet expenditures had totalled over DM 330 billion (approximately $203 billion). Of this, DM 153 billion had been spent on subsidies and privatization, DM 20 billion had covered the outstanding credits and interest payments of the enterprises, DM 43 billion had been spent on environmental clean-up measures and DM 37 billion had been disbursed on other expenditures.(Besides privatizing enterprises, the Treuhand had sold buildings and plots of land, including farmland and forests.) Contrary to initial hopes that it would be largely self-financing, it had thus accumulated a deficit of DM 250 billion (approximately $154 billion). This deficit alone distinguishes the German experience from that of the CEETEs - none of which could possibly have accumulated such debts to finance its transition. For instance, DM 250 billion was about five times the GDPof the Czech Republic in 1994, but one tenth of the GDP of Germany.
Following its closure, the Treuhand was, in 1995, split into four units. Two of the most important are the Bundesanstalt fur Vereinigungsbedingte Sonderaufgaben (BVS) (the Federal Agency for Special Tasks Resulting from Unification)
and the Beteiligungs Management Gesellschaft (BMG) (the Participatory Management Agency). BVS is responsible for what had been the core activities of the Treuhand, namely, regulating contractual obligations initially agreed upon by the Treuhand and purchasers, liquidating the remaining unsaleable companies and providing financial assistance for environmental clean-up and improvement schemes. It is slated to operate through 31 December 1996. A
major difference with respect to the Treuhand, however, is that BVS is not allowed to raise capital in the financial markets, but rather must rely on funds allocated to it out of the federal budget. Meanwhile, BMG supervises the sale of the remaining viable companies that were still available for purchase. The budget for the two agencies together was DM 5.5 billion for 1995 and DM 5.5 billion for 1996.
In the first phase of the Treuhand's activities, some 8,000 enterprises with over 4 million employees (or roughly 45 per cent of the total employment of the former German Democratic Republic) in 65,000 plants - were transferred to it. The stated asset value of these firms was DM 620 billion, though in reality it was much less - an issue that will be discussed below. A second phase, which began almost a year later, involved an additional property transfer of almost 10 million acres of land - which is about 40 per cent of the territory of the former GDR. In addition, all properties formerly belonging to the State Police, the former ruling party and the unions were shifted to the Treuhand.
The Treuhand was in effect disposing of what had been the tangible productive assets of a country.
The first step undertaken by the Treuhand was an assessment of the viability of the enterprises entrusted to it. Roughly one third of the firms under the Treuhand's control were deemed economically viable in a market economy, another third were judged potentially viable after being restructured, and the final third were considered non-viable under all circumstances. The strategy adopted was to attempt to privatize the first group as quickly as possible, to restructure and then privatize the second set, and to liquidate the last group.
The underlying premise in this approach was that the Treuhand could accurately determine which group any given firm belonged in.
Restructuring, while superficially a single process, actually comprised several phases. The first phase may be termed "legal reorganization" and involved such activities as the choice of a legal structure for the firm, splitting up the enterprise where necessary, and the reallocation of enterprises' real estate. The second stage involved evaluating the potential of the enterprise and covered such activities as developing individual enterprise plans for rehabilitation and making decisions as regards closure of lines of activity. Financial reorganization was yet a third phase. This required recalculating enterprise accounts using western norms, redeeming debt, increasing equity capital, guaranteeing bank loans to the firms and providing redundancy payments to reduce employment. Finally, economic restructuring comprised activities such as investing in fixed capital, scrapping obsolete fixed capital, recruiting new personnel, training staff, making personnel cut-backs and, (in other ways)
increasing productivity.
The Treuhand's approach was to involve itself intimately in the first two steps of the process (namely, legal reorganization and evaluation), to concern itself only partially with the third phase (financial reorganization) and to leave the fourth phase of economic restructuring almost entirely up to the private investors who were the new owners. Following these principles, privatization was achieved predominately by way of sale or donation to outside investors, as the outcome of individual negotiations on enterprises regarding investment and employment potential. Where this was not possible, other methods - such as management buyouts or sales to intermediaries - were employed.
The responsibility for finding a buyer for a Treuhand firm rested jointly with its management and the Treuhand. For industries in which international participation was crucial (such as chemicals), the Treuhand looked to international investment banks to seek out buyers.
Once interested parties were identified, the Treuhand sought to establish whether the potential buyer had the means and management skills to purchase and to continue to operate the enterprise. This assessment was made on the basis of a written business plan that the potential buyer had to provide, indicating product markets, investment and employment plans and the likely relationship with local suppliers and customers.
Embedded in the Treuhand's method was the objective of safeguarding a company as far as possible. Successful investors were therefore those who proposed plans that demonstrated convincingly that they would be able to continue operating a company with reasonable prospects of profit. The interpretation of "continue" was very narrow. It was taken to mean "retain the main emphasis of the business, as well as its location". This of course greatly restricted the range of privatization possibilities. Generally speaking, potential investors were rejected if they signified their intention of turning a company to another use or reselling it. This insistence on the preservation of companies and production locations when virtually the entire economy was being restructured may have represented misplaced concreteness, at least on purely economic grounds.The Government's main goal, however, was business continuity.
A Treuhand priority was thus to enforce investors' commitments to keeping companies running. This held true even when companies were good candidates for bankruptcy. The Treuhand stipulated that buyers present not only future business plans, but also the prospects for important strategic variables, in particular employment and investment levels. Moreover, compared with other goals, the negotiation over the purchase price, which would be the primary concern in a normal market acquisition, was a secondary consideration and was frequently shaped more by investors' promises than by the value of companies'
assets.
A firm's accounting net worth would be a first indicator of the sale price that the Treuhand might seek from the sale. However, the actual price demanded reflected three further variables: the amount of investment the buyer pledged to undertake, the number of jobs guaranteed, and the speed with which the adjustment plan could be implemented. As a rule of thumb, the purchase price was reduced by between DM 20,000 and DM 50,000 for each worker the buyer was prepared to retain.
The law governing the Treuhand's operations stated both that State-owned companies should be privatized "as quickly as possible" and that they should be put into a condition in which they would henceforth be competitive.
However, no hierarchical relationship between these two objectives was specified and the Treuhand was criticized for putting its overriding emphasis on rapid privatization.
By the end of its operations, the Treuhand had privatized 14,000 enterprises and liquidated, or had ready for liquidation, 3,340 others. The successor agencies were to attempt to save some enterprises that were on the point of liquidation. 
The degree of difficulty encountered in carrying out this privatization process had varied. For instance, banks, construction firms, hotels and restaurants were privatized rather easily, as were industrial firms with locational advantages. Small firms were sold more easily than larger ones. Large industrial firms that had exported mainly to Central and Eastern Europe - such as automobile manufacturers, railway-carriage makers and shipbuilders - were difficult to sell (or even donate). Chemical industries, electronics firms, machine tool making firms and steel mills posed even more of a problem and, in some instances, were marketable only if production and employment could be cut back by 80 or 90 per cent and additional financial support offered.
Sales to citizens of the western Lander accounted for some 75 per cent of all sales and part-sales of firms. Only some 5-10 per cent of sales, or part-sales, were to non-Germans and less than one fifth were management buyouts (MBOs). It has been noted that this latter statistic may in fact overstate the participation of the eastern Lander~ citizens, since many MBOs actually involved a western Lander partner. 34 Non-German investors were initially very wary: In 1990, only some 1,000 foreign investors responded to the Treuhand's solicitations to invest in the former GDR and those foreign entities that did invest often did so via the German subsidiaries of their company. 35 
When the Treuhand commenced its operations, it expected revenues from sale of its portfolio of firms of some DM 600 billion. 36 What became unmistakable by 1992, however, and of increasing concern, was that the basic premise of the whole operation - namely, that the privatization of property previously belonging to the State would create the conditions for an immediate economic upswing in the eastern Lander and that only a certain, limited amount of initial money would be necessary to set the wheels of recovery into motion - was proving to have been false. 37 Over time, the Treuhand's financial position was marked by decreasing net privatization receipts and rising expenditures for financial restructuring, interest payments on old and new debts and payments for legal obligations. The mode of privatization gradually shifted from sales to donations.
The Treuhand's balance sheet for its opening day (1 July 1990) - which was presented only in October 1992 in light of the magnitude of the task that the Treuhand had faced in preparing it - cited a "negative net worth" of DM 209 billion. This was at the very least surprising. 3BIt was not obvious how the assets of an economy that, according to many internationally accepted statistics, produced enough to give its citizens a higher average per capita income than Greece or Portugal in the late 1980s had not only no value, but a negative one. 39 Several reasons have been given to explain this negative net worth. First, the centrally planned economies of Eastern Europe had paid scant attention to the environmental impact of their activities. Thus, certain industrial sites could be sold under the newly applicable German law only if cleaned up or restored. Second, the value of the output of many firms was less than the cost of producing it when assessed at prices of the former FRG, with the one-to-one east-west exchange rate. Such firms were worthless, in essence, if they had to operate at prices of the former FRG. Third, the Treuhand had taken over enterprises inclusive of their debts and guaranteed their reimbursement. It has been argued that those who gained from this strategy were the banks in the eastern Lander. Their loan portfolios were rehabilitated and they became attractive takeover prospects for banks in the former FRG. Fourth, most enterprises were undercapitalized, as the concept of "net worth" had played no significant role in the centrally planned system. The fact that the Treuhand had taken over these enterprises' debts and recognized compensation claims had the accounting effect of a large initial infusion of capital. 
It has been suggested that the size of the Treuhand's deficits were partly caused by its sales strategy. It is argued that, as the Treuhand did not sell equity shares but only whole companies, such institutional investors and individuals as were ready, willing and able to bear the risks of resurrecting the eastern Lander by incorporating shares of Treuhand companies into their portfolios were unable to do so. They could participate only by becoming entrepreneurs and buying whole companies. Had the Treuhand opted for a longer time-horizon for privatization, it might have pursued a strategy of, (for instance) capitalizing enterprises and selling part of the shares to a "strategic" investor and part on financial markets. Also, it could have spread out the dates of sale.
A second absorption problem lay in the severe credit constraints faced by potential buyers of Treuhand assets. Unresolved property disputes 41 and the absence of equity capital made it practically impossible for citizens in the eastern Lander to borrow for the purpose of buying Treuhand assets. Moreover, the condition that buyers make full and immediate payment in effect required the buyer to finance the purchase with its own new borrowing, increasing the demand for funds in capital markets of the western Lander. In addition, the surge in demand and growth in the western Lander that accompanied the reintegration strategy prompted the Bundesbank to tighten monetary policy. This boosted interest rates in Germany and thereby lowered the capitalized value of the assets that the Treuhand wished to dispose of, and this resulted in potential buyers' reducing their bids. 
The Treuhand was a major part of Germany's transition strategy for the eastern Lander. It was - and had to be - a unique approach for a unique situation.
After the fact, the Treuhand has been accused of making mistakes, although this was almost inevitable in view of the prime objective of accomplishing its task quickly. This insistence on speed was an integral part of the overall strategy which did accomplish its main mission. Today, the economies of the eastern Lander are growing rapidly, even while the rest of Germany struggles with a very sluggish situation. Furthermore, capital formation is now high, with strong private as well as continuing public investment. The outlook is encouraging, although the eastern unemployment rate is still considerably above the western rate (see table VI.S).
In terms of understanding the Treuhand experience, the context of the period is important. The Government was particularly concerned about preventing large population movements from the eastern to the western Lander, owing to the attraction of higher wages in the latter. Living conditions in the east had thus to be supported by the Government as the economic structure was at the same time being largely remade. In the event, the Government chose to fix the eastern exchange rate at a high level, thereby making much of eastern output even less competitive than it might otherwise have been. Also, the environmental standards and social insurance precepts of the west had to be extended to the east. With rapidly rising eastern wage rates, unemployment - open as well as disguised - would soar. Large fiscal transfers were thus inescapable, but they would diminish as the economy of the eastern Lander revived. The economic transition thus had to be quick. Economic structures had to be changed and enterprises reborn. A new class of entrepreneurs had to be created, or managers that had previously responded to bureaucratic incentives needed to be given, and needed to respond to, market-based incentives. Here lay the Treuhand's role.
The Treuhand accomplished what it had set out to do - namely privatize the industry of the eastern Lander. This was accompanied by a rapid rise in unemployment, despite the employment guarantees that were often required of prospective buyers of firms. In place from the beginning was of course a "safety net" - the unemployment and other benefits. that the citizens of the eastern Lander enjoyed as citizens of a unified Germany.
Because firms tended to be closed down rather than reorganized if no buyers could be found, critics of the Treuhand have accused it of incurring unnecessary economic costs by promoting massive de-industrialization. The rebuttal was that privatization represented the only way companies could obtain managers and markets. Accordingly, the Treuhand was actually a buyer of management, technology and access to markets for the companies in its portfolio, rather than (as generally perceived) a seller of assets.1l3 Sceptics of this approach maintain that only rapid modernization of often outdated equipment would have given former GDR enterprises a chance to compete in their new markets; but the Treuhand consciously left this to others wherever possible, letting speed of privatization be its guiding principle. The German Government thought that private owners would be the best ones to make decisions on investment and that it should involve itself as little as possible in this process.
The Treuhand's operating strategy is also said to have raised unemployment.
However, the national decision to bring wages in the eastern Lander into line with those in the western Lander rendered a large number of enterprises unprofitable. Labour had to be shed in order for these to be sold. However, it has also been argued that the dramatic rundown of industrial employment can be traced to the Treuhand's efforts to contain its expenditure. From the Treuhand's perspective, it was prudent to layoff workers who would then go into retraining or job-creation schemes, or collect unemployment insurance - all at the expense of a federal agency other than the Treuhand.
In the event, both the number of jobs guaranteed per firm (or part of firm)
sold, and the total numbers in industrial employment, dropped rapidly. Roughly 200 jobs were guaranteed per sale in the Treuhand's first year of operation, and only about 50 jobs per sale in the first half of 1993.45 Table VI.8 shows how the employment situation in the eastern Lander deteriorated after 1990.
The increase in unemployment was scarcely avoidable because of the low productivity oflabour, which was itself largely due to outdated capital.Seventy six per cent of the equipment in industry in the eastern Lander was older than 5 years, some 55 per cent was older than 10 years, and some 20 per cent was older than 20 years.Many factories were not suitable for modem production methods, warehouses were overly. large, and production techniques were geared to the member countries of CMEA. Some 75 percent of the former GDR's exports had been directed to the CMEA countries prior to 1990. However, the volume of imports of the ex-CMEA area declined by fully 30 per cent in 1991 (see annex table A.20). Many products that might have supplied these markets could not begin to compete internationally in other markets because of poor quality. Finally, personnel was not adapted to modem production processes.
The turnaround in the eastern Lander came about fairly soon and the economy has seen positive growth since early 1992. The transfer payments from the western Lander helped support the revival, but recovery became more solidly based as a more up-to-date capital stock came into being in the new Lander.
Indeed, the capital goods-producing industry in the east is itself strengthening.
Order books in the capital goods sector grew 21 per cent in 1995 and were 35 per cent above the 1991 level. Foreign orders for eastern manufactures grew 24 per cent, pointing to improving productivity.
The gap between wage and productivity levels in the western and eastern Lander has narrowed. In the second half of 1994, average wages and salaries in the new Lander reached 70 per cent of western Lander gross earnings (compared with 34 per cent in the second half of 1990); but average productivity amounted to only 54 per cent of the western Lander level. This was, however, an increase from 26 per cent in the second half of 1990.
The output of the distribution, transport, telecommunications and other services sectors in the eastern Lander also expanded rapidly after having been impeded (having been deemed "unproductive") under the former system.
Their contribution to value added rose from 30 per cent of GDP in the second half of 1990 to 37 per cent in the first half of 1995.

If the economic transition in eastern Germany accompanied reintegration into a large developed economy, the transition in the countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) accompanied political and economic breakup - that of the Soviet Union. This made for a different experience or, more properly, several different ones. There is simply not enough experience nor data to separate the transient phenomena, caused by general confusion and institutional disarray in the initial stages of transition, from the more stable emerging trends that will eventually shape each country's individual pattern of change and adjustment. The Russian Federation, however, owing to its role in the region, as well as to the greater availability of statistics, provides an especially important case-study of investment under transition.

Even before the dissolution of the Soviet Union, reforms were being attempted so as to make investment more efficient as the limitations of the centrally planned system became more grave. The share of centralized funds in gross investment had been declining steadily since the early 1980s in accordance with the policy of increasing the independence of enterprises through "self-financing". Before the reforms, enterprises had to remit to the central ministries a part of their notional "depreciation allowance", as determined by the central authorities. The ministries then decided what part of these sums would be returned to each enterprise to enable it to maintain the value of its assets. In practice, loss-making enterprises tended to receive part of the "depreciation allowance" of more successful enterprises. Under the new dispensation, enterprises were permitted to retain a significant share of depreciation funds.
A further step was contained in the Enterprise Law of 1987. Enterprises were to retain the bulk of their "depreciation allowances" and a much larger part of their profits, with which they were expected to finance investment. It was expected that the new procedure would create incentives for more efficient decisions on the microeconomic level. There was a degree of success in this drive towards self-financing - between 1987 and 1991, the share of "centralized resources" (funds allocated centrally by the State) in total investment declined from 82 to 35 per cent. 
It was also believed that the State could effectively conduct its policy of restructuring industries primarily through government investment credits for priority sectors on favourable terms, as well as through off-budget funds for specific programmes. In practice, the policy proved marginal, as inadequate funds were allocated to the programmes.
More centrally, this policy of extending "financial independence" to enterprises came into conflict with the unchanged principles of state ownership and control. The hierarchical state structures continued to allocate inputs and outputs, assign business partners, set all prices and, even more significantly, provide supplementary budget financing wherever an enterprise's own funds proved insufficient (in other words, "soft budget constraints" were not hardened).
Moreover, the decentralization of the financing system dramatically weakened mechanisms of accountability and control. Enterprises became financially "independent" without becoming accountable - either to state planning bodies or ministries (as in the standard practice under central planning) or to a board of directors or shareholders (as in market economies). This lack offinancial accountability prompted numerous enterprises to channel their newly obtained additional resources into their wage bills to the detriment of investment.
Since enterprises were certain of budget support even if their investment proved to be misguided, they began a multitude ofinappropriate investment projects, and this was followed by the growth of overdue and unfinished construction.
In short, overall investment efficiency, which had not been very high to begin with, declined further.

Were one to look at the data for investment as a share of GDP, it might appear that the Russian economy had not suffered notably since 1992. Indeed, for the USSR, the average investment ratios for the period 1980-1989 were over 30 per cent of GDP, a figure significantly above the world average for 1977-1988 of about 24 per cent and even more significantly above the devel oped economies ratio of 21.5 per cent.The data for the post-1992 period show that the investment ratio remains, despite its falling, higher than typical (see table VI.9). Nevertheless, investment has represented a falling share of a falling GDP and a significant portion of that investment might well be deemed inappropriate today for capital formation.
Indeed, the transition to a market mechanism dramatically changed the investment picture. Hard budget constraints were first introduced in 1992, and output in state enterprises plummeted, income fell, and a contraction in investment occurred in that year and in subsequent years. One reason for the fall in investment was the abrupt and massive contraction in the share of one of the principal figures in investment activity, namely the State, without there being other actual or potential sources of investment either available or ready to fill the void.
The State's withdrawal was the result of two policy developments that, while part of the strategy for the transition to a market economy, were disruptive to investment in the short run. These were the rapid and wide-scale privatization of State-owned enterprises and the discontinuation of direct budget subsidies, even for enterprises that remained wholly or partly owned by the Goverument.
A temporary fall in the volume of investment was not entirely a misfortune, as many projects were inappropriate to begin with, as noted above. Indeed, the recent trend of new fixed investment by sector is more consistent with data on capacity utilization for these sectors, implying that new investment has been better related to demand. The ratio of investment in services to investment in the goods-producing sectors has risen, for example, while there has been a sharp decline in investment in agriculture, machine-building and light industry.
The collapse of state procurement had a particularly severe effect on machine-building with its traditionally very high share of defence-related production.
The sectors that are seeing stronger investment activity are primarily services, retail trade and residential construction. As in Central and Eastern Europe, the service and trade sectors had been neglected under the centrally planned model and their rehabilitation is essential to the performance of the market economy. The upsurge in construction, including the refurbishment of offices, has already transformed the appearance of many city centres. New construction and assembly in gross fixed investment grew from 44 per cent in 1990 to 65 per cent in 1994.
However, the degree of distortion in the production structure of the Russian economy that investment will have to overcome is substantial. One indication is that, with the liberalization of foreign trade, the Russian market for both durable and non-durable consumer goods was increasingly being satisfied by imports, as consumers demanded higher-quality products. This import surge smothered non-competitive domestic production, but the phenomenon suggests as well the vast market awaiting high-quality producers.
This notwithstanding, the economy is showing signs of responding to market incentives; for example, the increased openness of the Russian economy has brought a relative boom in several export-oriented sectors - fuel and energy, chemicals and metallurgy. With higher exports, the rate of output decline in the energy sector was about half, and in non-ferrous metallurgy one third, of the industrial production average. As a result, the share of mining and other primary sectors in aggregate industrial production increased from 15.5 to 23.5 per cent. It is important to note, however, that while maintenance of production required certain investment expenditures, it did not involve any major domestic funding of these sectors. Instead, new investment was largely financed by tied foreign credits.

While the most recent information indicates that there is considerable pentup demand that could be satisfied from domestic production and that investment is being reallocated to sectors essential for the market economy, it may still be asked why the overall amount of investment activity has so far not been stronger. Certainly, the initial fall in investment after the start of transition was not unique to the Russian Federation as the discussion of the experiences of other countries presented above has shown. However, investment in those countries strengthened after some years.
As previously noted, when central planning ended in what is now the Russian Federation, firms were already expected to finance the bulk of their investment needs from their own internal resources. Table VI.10 shows that internal funds covered about two thirds of investment in the post-planning years. The remaining third, in which government investment outlays were prevalent, was financed externally with funds mainly passed through the commercial banks.
As part of the general and protracted economic decline that followed the breakup of the USSR and the start of transition, a quarter of industrial enterprises were reported to be in the loss-making category in 1995 compared with less than 10 per cent in 1993, and enterprises' liquid assets covered less than a quarter of overdue accounts payable (compared with over 50 per cent in 1993). The savings of enterprises were in many instances financing an accumulation of inventories in the form of unsaleable goods. Also, the enterprises were not receiving payments for their goods and services and so some of their "savings" were locked up in involuntary credits to customers. In these circumstances, firms were thus not in a position to finance investment projects, especially middle- and long-range ones necessary for restructuring. Even enterprises that managed to realize a profit tended to direct a diminishing share of profits to investment. The share of retained profits in total investment fell from 23 per cent in 1991 to 12 per cent in 1993.
At the same time, the share of depreciation allowances in total investment dropped from 29 per cent in 1991 to 7 per cent in 1993.55 This was caused by the progressive undervaluation of the book value of fixed assets in the high inflation environment of the early transition period. Several revaluation exercises were undertaken to raise the book value of assets in industry across the board, but this did not keep pace with inflation and the Government now plans to make valuation indexation regular and transparent. Enterprises, however, have not always welcomed the revaluation of their fixed assets, preferring to boost their distributable profits through inadequate depreciation charges. This too reduces the resources at the disposal of firms for replacing inventories and capital stock.
Nevertheless, even if internal funds were adequate, there were general and serious discouragements to investment. As with many of the CEETEs, macroeconomic instability in the early years of transition, manifested most clearly in high rates of inflation, made businesses reluctant to invest. It was not just the high level of inflation, but also its unpredictability, that was important.
The course of the privatization programme and the continuing uncertainty about its future direction have also had a significant discouraging effect on investment. Management is unlikely to take a long-term view in running an enterprise whose ownership is unclear and perceived as unstable. Indeed, uncertainty regarding the terms of ownership plus ineffective accountability led to widespread misuse of assets for short-term purposes (like asset-stripping to service the wage bill) and even, in some reported instances, for the personal enrichment of the managers. In general, the uncertainty of changes in the legal, .regulatory and administrative environment, plus the high degree of discretion on the part of officials in implementing and enforcing the often unstable and non-transparent rules and procedures, has encouraged corruption and rent-seeking. The combination of these factors has created a nearly hostile environment for enterprise managers willing to invest in production. Finance external to the firm that managers might tap for investment programmes also shrank, owing primarily to the fall in government investment outlays described above. The precarious state of the federal budget did not permit the State to become a decisive provider of investment for the economy nor to contribute significantly to the sluggish demand for domestically produced investment goods. In 1992-1995, the federal budget financed less than 15 per cent of gross investment in the Russian Federation.
The Government's 1994 programme envisaged creating a mechanism to stimulate investment in what it considered priority sectors by financing at least 20 per cent of a project's overall cost from the budget. The decision to allocate state funds for investment support was to be made on a case-by-case basis from among the competitive tenders submitted by enterprises to an investment tender commission of the Ministry of Economics. The criterion for selection of a project and the State's share in its financing was "the importance of the new production for the country's economy".
However, so far the programme has not lived up to expectations for a number of reasons. One is the shortage of budget funds, which led to delays in disbursements for those projects that were selected, and thereby to a loss of confidence of major potential non-government participants in the programme.
Another reason is that, given the state of broad decline in industry, it was particularly difficult to select specific projects for government investment support.
The State's investment support remains traditionally oriented: in 1994, 37 per cent of investment in material production sectors was directed towards fuel and energy, while machine-building received only 5 per cent. The same priority subsists in the Government's programme for 1995-1997: fuel and energy, metallurgy, construction, chemical and petrochemical, timber, machine-building, defence and, finally, light industry, agriculture and transportation, in that order.
Government funds are made available to enterprises for investment through the intermediation of commercial banks. These funds were in fact one of the major initial sources of the banks' liquidity. One common practice was to deliberately delay disbursement to enterprises of the funds received from the budget, and to use the money for currency arbitrage or other short-term speculation.
Profits from these activities have bolstered the financial position of many commercial banks.
Another potential source of funds for the banks is household saving. Under central planning, the household sector played a minor role in the financing of .
investment. Household savings were simply not a part of the equation. Such traditional motivations for individual saving in market economies as financial security after retirement, access to health care and education were not present:
the State took care of literally everything and provided a comprehensive and reliable, if modest, social support system. Even real estate, the major vehicle of intergenerational transfers in market economies, did not involve substantial individual savings since, in an absolute majority of cases, housing was provided by the State either directly or through employers that were of course State owned.There was only one institution to service household saving, the Sberbank, which had an extensive network of branches throughout the country. Its primary function was to accumulate individual savings and channel the funds into the state budget.
With the move to a market economy, households acquired a stronger motivation to save. Their savings in financial form grew from 7.5 per cent of GDP in 1990 to 17 per cent in 1994 (see table VI.ll). The composition of those savings has changed rapidly since 1992: the share of cash on hand has fallen and that of foreign currency purchases has grown rapidly. In 1994 and 1995, households devoted more than twice as much of their saving to foreign currency purchases as to bank deposits and securities. This suggests that there is a significant level of household savings that is lost to intermediation by the domestic financial sector. Indeed, as it is held in the currency of another country, it is lost to the Russian economy. The attraction exerted on households by foreign currency seems to be explainable mainly in the following terms: The general macroeconomic instability and concomitant inflation made it more attractive to hold savings in foreign currency or to send those savings abroad -legally or illegally - than to place them in the financial sector.
In addition, with the exception of Sberbank, which has over 30 thousand retail outlets throughout the country, most commercial banks created during the transition ~ even the largest and most sophisticated - have a very rudimentary retail presence even in Moscow. Retail operations are costly to build (although they are a major source of funds in the long run) and have not resulted in immediate and large profits, as have dealings on currency exchanges and operations in government securities. Recently, however, several major commercial banks have started to develop networks of retail operations; nevertheless, as of the end-1995, household deposits constituted less than 1 per cent of the commercial banks' liquid funds.
Another side of the problem is that the confidence in financial intermediation is very low among the country's population, in particular after nearly 40 million people were robbed of their savings in 1994 by the many fraudulent financial companies which in most cases proved to be nothing but "pyramid schemes" that collapsed without ever making any contribution to productive investment. In the light of this experience, the forthcoming law on deposit insurance is highly relevant. Moreover, numerous investment funds either are in the process of being transformed into bona fide mutual funds and commercial banks, or have folded. In addition, the mechanisms and procedures of stock trade registration and custody are only now being put in place. In sum, it will be some time before household saving becomes an actual rather than a potential major source of investment funds.
The one player in investment activity that has a potentially large role is the country's commercial banking system. Along with being an intermediary in the flow of government, enterprise and now household funds, the banks have accumulated substantial funds of their own. They have nevertheless been quite reluctant to commit them to investment in the real economy.
Clearly, the factors that discouraged managers and owners of enterprises from using retained earnings to finance new investment can readily explain why in many instances even highly developed financial institutions would be unwilling to supply investment capital to a particular enterprise. Yet in the same way as many obstacles have to be removed before the full potential of retained earnings as a source of investment finance in the emerging market environment can be realized, so also must progress in financial intermediation be made before these institutions will play their full role.
With the start of transition, a new financial system was needed. Financial intermediation became the fastest growing and fastest evolving sphere in the country's economy. A two-tier bank system was created (a Central Bank and separate commercial banks) and other mechanisms and tools of financial intermediation grew in number, in sophistication and in the range of financial services offered. A relatively elaborate, and rapidly developing, financial intermediation industry, a more realistic price structure resulting from progress in price liberalization, and the current account convertibility of the rouble created a totally new environment, and mechanisms, procedures and incentive matrices for money flows.
The credit activity of the commercial banks grew very rapidly after the transition started, but, as far as corporate financing is concerned, the credits mostly financed working capital. The fact that they did not invest in the real economy in any meaningful volume is explained by a combination offactors. First of all, alternatives to investing their available resources in the real economy like currency arbitrage and operations with government securities - were until very recently significantly more profitable (for more detail, see chap. II).
Second, many-faceted uncertainty dampened investment demand. Third, even had the demand existed, establishing credit risk would have been nearly impossible since widespread non-payment has obfuscated the real financial status of enterprises.As a result, potential creditors have been very wary of extending new finance.
Moreover, since the mechanism of collateral, although enacted into law, was not yet operational, high-risk premiums were perceived by the enterprises'
creditors as the principal insurance against default. This, in conjunction with the monetary tightness that was part of the anti-inflationary struggle, raised real interest rates quite high, thus effectively cutting many potential borrowers out of the credit market. The banks have continued to seek very large spreads between borrowing and lending rates even though inflation has receded.
The banks are not unique in their reluctance t6 provide finance for investment.
On a more general level, it remains a serious problem for willing financial agents to find acceptable placements for their investment funds. At the same time, many parts of industry are hungry for finance. In theory, market forces would mainly direct investment flows in an appropriate way. In reality, the rapid marketization of the economy, with9ut the creation of many of the institutions needed for the efficient functioning of market forces, created an often chaotic situation in which clear signals of where investment would be most profitable were often not given.
Yet, commercial banks, even while reluctant to lend to potential investors, have moved towards involvement in capital formation in the real economy: they have acquired privatized domestic enterprises. This process, which took off in 1995, became feasible and extremely profitable owing to the severe undervaluation, in terms of a normal international comparison, of the fixed assets of Russian enterprises, including the huge energy and high-tech producers.
A new form of conglomerate has thus been created with state encouragement - the financial-industrial groups (FIGs). The FIGs usually comprise banks (or investment funds), and industrial and trading enterprises. Some groups concentrate their activities and holdings in a specific sector like oil and gas, metallurgy, or automotive production with the objective of concentrating the control of all aspects of the production cycle within the FIG. Others are more diversified and have cross-holdings in a number of industries. A typical group's components are interlinked by a network of cross-holdings, credits and other financing, stocks, and business links with outside suppliers and customers.
By mid-February 1996, there were 30 officially registered FIGs, up from 15 in August 1995. All together, they controlled nearly 300 industrial enterprises, and 70 banks and other financial companies and employed 2.5 million people.
The State is a partner in each of these FIGs; its holding varies but is below 25 per cent in every case.It is believed that the actual number of conglomerates is much higher and could well be in the hundreds, but that many prefer to remain unofficial.
It remains to be seen whether the FIGs will prove to be merely another means to redistribute assets or whether they will provide a means to overcome the impediments to financial intermediation noted above. In this regard, some positive developments have already been observed. One example is that the Menatep group has invested over $35 million in its eight food plants in the Moscow region through Rosprom, Menatep's industrial holding company. An investment programme was also designed to increase domestic food production capacity.All together, nearly 200 major investment projects with an aggregate investment of over $3 billion were reportedly in various states of preparation by the FIGs.
The most plausible explanation for this burst of investment activity in the midst of hesitation, reluctance to invest, currency hoarding, and capital flight is that, out of nearly 2,500 banks that appeared in the Russian Federation since the start of economic reform, nearly 80 per cent had been created by industrial enterprises that combined their funds with those of partners from wholesale and retail trade, insurance and sometimes even local Governments.
These banks were specifically created to meet their sponsors' financial needs, naturally on preferential terms. With the explosive growth of the financial intermediation business, the roles reversed and the banks evolved: From being auxiliary financial branches of their corporate sponsors, they became in effect the principals in new, diversified conglomerates. So far these banks have limited their financing to the companies that originally were their founders and shareholders (and which they now control). This process acquired new scope and intensity after the introduction of the loans-for-shares programme in the second half of 1995. Under this scheme, which has attracted some controversy, the. Government took the equity shares that it had retained in privatized companies and sold some of the shares to large commercial banks in exchange for loans that these banks made to the Government.
Finally, other recent developments may supply the element that has still been missing to foster a recovery of investment activity. Yields on three-month Treasury bills, after remaining in the 90-140 per cent range for most of 1995, dropped sharply in the last months of the year, removing the last major highyielding sector from the financial market. The banks, faced with the task of finding profitable employment for their funds, were forced to look at investment in the real economy. According to the head of one of the Russian Federation's largest commercial banks, "the time of speculative operations is over;
now the priority is investment".
The economies in transition have been in the midst of an economic and political revolution and revolutions are by nature neither smooth nor predictable.
In all the cases examined in this chapter, an old order crumbled - a political order as well as an economic one - as the previous model had proved unable to satisfy either political or economic aspirations. Different strategies were adopted by the new authorities for recovery and reform, depending on the particular histories and situations of each country, but they all anticipated a major role for new capital formation under principles that bore little relationship to the model of the old regime.
In all cases, the centrally planned model was rejected and there was a widespread desire to move towards a market economy as rapidly as possible. After decades of detailed government direction, there was no longer a majority in the nascent democracies for maintaining an overwhelming degree of direct government control over the economy. The government's role was to be reduced as firms were privatized. The rapid and broad liberalization of foreign trade did not allow government a role in choosing which infant or senile industries to support during the transformation.
At the beginning of the transfonnation, it was popularly anticipated that economic agents would react quickly to the incentives that sprang up from the rapid marketization of the economy and that a surge in investment would help satisfy the very large domestic demand for higher-quality products. Although foreign investment was to be welcomed, especially for introducing new technology, it was generally thought that domestic resources would be sufficient.
In the event, the new authorities had to contend with a worsening of the already serious economic situation. The influx of imports threatened the viability of domestic competitors. Prospects were truly unclear at first and this deterred private investors who have to balance perceived risks against anticipated rewards before making commitments. As a result, investment was at first not forthcoming.
Although the main direction of change - the rapid move to the market system - was established at the beginning, policy in the years of transformation can still be seen as offering an example of learning by doing, involving a great deal of experimentation. Nevertheless, it seems there have been certain common features of transfonnation, at least as regards investment and the enterprise sector.
One such feature was the sharply negative reassessment with regard to the value of enterprise assets once countries had abandoned central planning and begun their transition to market economies. Almost overnight, many going concerns became hopeless failures. Critics argue that to some degree Governments made the situation worse than it had to be (for example, by forcing finns in the eastern Lander of Germany to absorb the consequences for relative prices of an overvalued exchange rate and a quick march towards wage parity with the western Lander, not to mention the imposition of strict environmental standards).
It was also argued that some of the assets could have had more years of productive life had the changes been phased in over a longer period.
In view of the discrediting of the old system, the case for a slow adaptation was lost from the start of the transfonnation, and government plans revolved around how soon the transfonnation process could be completed. In any event, the strategy of swift privatization generally embodied the expectation that, although the new owners would scrap obsolete equipment, they would also breathe new life and new investment into finns and rescue the assets that could be salvaged. Also, the formation of new private enterprises was anticipated.
On the whole, in the CEETEs and eastern Lander of Germany that began the transformation before the Russian Federation, these expectations were realized after the destructive phase: investment has picked up, new enterprises are being formed, more marketable goods are being produced and labour productivity has risen sharply. These achievements were facilitated by past investments in human capital and also in structures. There are many signs that the Russian Federation, too, is following on the path set by the earlier transformers.
Its destructive phase, however, has been severe.
Another common feature was the government's being expected to play a major role in the move towards the market economy, in the sense not only of withdrawing from exerting direct economic control and of establishing macroeconomic stability, but also of building new institutions. The Governments were not merely passive observers of markets, but actively sought to maintain employment and promote export competitiveness. Support for the privatization process took many forms. This entailed in some cases direct financial support, including absorbing of old debts to make enterprises more attractive propositions, and in other cases special efforts to close agreements with "strategic"
direct foreign investors.
A final common feature was the recognition that virtually an entirely new financial sector would be needed, one that operated on completely different principles for those prevailing under central planning where the financial sector had been essentially a conduit for government financial flows to enterprises.
The main failure of the financial sector is that for the most part it has not yet become the main intermediary from private saving to enterprise investment.
This failure is partly explained by the fact that the institutions that had been called commercial banks under the previous regime were suddenly expected to behave like banks in market economies - and could not. The new financial-industrial groups in the Russian Federation seem to have arisen as one method of coping with the problem, but they appear to constitute only a partial solution.
All in all, a reasonable hypothesis would recognize that a lack of saving is not the major constraint on investment in the transition economies and that the problem is rather one of bringing the savings that are available into an efficient financial sector that works at arm's length with enterprise borrowers. However, pressure to make the financial sector work more effectively in this way is likely to grow as the legal and macroeconomic situation normalizes and as enterprises, stimulated by the increases in output and productivity that the new economic environment has already made possible, undertake more fixed capital formation, and look increasingly for resources to utilize.
During the past 15 years, developing countries have witnessed dramatic changes in the environment in which their economies operate and in their thinking about the foundations of development policy.
Policy makers have increasingly recognized that sustained economic growth requires macroeconomic stability and diversification of the economic structure away from dependency on a few export commodities, including oil, which does not allow for sufficient flexibility to adjust quickly to an ever changing economic environment and compounds their countries' vulnerability to exogenous shocks. As ever, investment has been seen as a key vehicle for spreading and deepening development. There has also been greater reliance on the private sector and on market forces: the role of Government in directly providing and in guiding investment has been retrenched, while private investment - under broad policy guidelines - has taken centre stage. Policies instituted have been wide ranging, and have had to respond to a sometimes accommodating and sometimes unforgiving external environment. However, since policies also reflect the particular domestic conditions operating in each country, the pattern of investment in this period has been markedly varied among developing countries.
In the light of the economic, political and social complexities at work, the analysis of investment and its determinants in developing countries has been carried out by means of a set of country case studies with the objective of highlighting the wide array of determinants of investment in the countries considered, as well as the scope of their policy treatments.
The six countries examined below - Bolivia, Cote d'Ivoire, Tunisia, Chile, Indonesia and China - are not intended to be a statistically representative sample of developing countries. Rather, they have been selected because of their diversity in terms of their success in bolstering investment, as well as to capture a range of economic structures, political conditions and levels of economic development and natural endowment. Factors pertinent to investment are discussed in the context of prevailing economic conditions, policies implemented, and political and social constraints.
Analysis of the case studies shows that despite the diversity of country experiences, a number of characteristics in terms of their policy direction and investment determinants seem to be shared by the six countries considered here, which may give some indication of the nature of the challenges that developing countries confront in their quest for higher investment levels and sustained growth.

In the early 1980s, Bolivia experienced a severe economic deterioration that culminated in an uncontrollable inflationary process and significant GDP
losses. In August 1985, drastic measures were adopted to put an end to hyperinflation.
The Government of Bolivia also embarked on a process of liberalization and restructuring of the economy. By controlling inflation and eliminating price distortions, the Government has sought to create a stable macroeconomic environment that would be conducive to investment. Private investment, however, has not responded as anticipated.
The key question is, why not? The answer seems to be that control over the major macroeconomic balances has not been assured enough, while the lack of consensus among the major players concerning the future direction of the economy has cast a measure of uncertainty on the sustainability of policies adopted so far. Moreover, a series of structural problems have depressed profitability and discouraged investment.
The sequence of reforms Over the past 10 years, reforms in Bolivia have been adopted in waves, each corresponding to a change in administration. The first wave occurred in the period 1985-1987, when policy was directed towards price stabilization and adjustment, i.e., towards the restoration of an enabling environment in which investment and growth could resume. The second wave of reform occurred in 1989-1992, when the economy was further liberalized and new opportunities for private - including foreign - investment were created. Finally, the current wave of reforms, initiated in 1993, has deepened past efforts and further opened up the economy to private initiatives.
Eliminating hyper-inflation was undoubtedly the place to start, since the economy was dysfunctional. Measures to correct the fiscal deficit were adopted:
prices of goods and services provided by the State were increased, wages were temporarily frozen, subsidies were abolished, government personnel were laid off and a tax reform was introduced. The dual exchange-rate system was abandoned and rates were unified, but at a rate thal entailed a de facto devaluation of 93 per cent. Most price controls were abolished, including controls on interest rates, and a process of trade liberalization was initiated.
In addition, the Government addressed its external debt. A heavy debt burden was viewed as a disincentive to investment since future debt servicing could heavily tax future returns that investments would generate. A strategy to reduce the debt burden was put in place, entailing buy-backs of commercial bank debt and the rescheduling of bilateral governmental loans on a concessional basis under the Paris Club, followed by a series of individual agreements with Bolivia's major bilateral official creditors.
The second cycle of reforms (1989-1992) concentrated on creating greater opportunities for the private investor. A more liberal regulatory framework was adopted, including the 1990 investment code, the 1990 hydrocarbons law, changes in the mining code and the 1992 privatization law. Restrictions on external trade were cut back further (fewer and simplified licensing procedures), while taxes on exports were reduced and import tariffs declined once more. Tariffs on imported capital goods were cut to 5 per cent to boost the investment effort in the economy.
The latest round of reforms were adopted by the current Administration, whose head, President Gonzalo Sanchez de Louzada, was one of the architects of the 1985 stabilization plan. Commitment to price stability was maintained, while the restructuring of the economy was taken one step further, as will be discussed below.
Investment in Bolivia during the second half of the 1970s had been high by historical standards, averaging 22 per cent of GDP during the period 19751979\
reflecting the favourable conditions to which the economy was then exposed: international prices of tin, one of Bolivia's major export commodities, were quite strong; large amounts of natural gas had begun to be exported to Argentina; and inexpensive international finance was available. Mining was the country's most dynamic activity and was dominated by the State. Consequently, a great deal of the investment effort had been originated by the public sector, particularly through its enterprises operating in the mining, hydrocarbon and energy generation sectors.
Economic conditions changed in the early 1980s, when the level of investment fell, averaging only II per cent of GDP during the period 1980-1984.
The hyper-inflationary process imposed a heavy toll on both public and private investment. In 1985, the stabilization package was announced, but an additional blow was inflicted on the country when tin prices collapsed on the London Metals Exchange in October 1985. By 1985, fixed investment had fallen to about 7 per cent of GDP, shared about equally between the private and the public sectors.
Price stabilization was achieved quickly and major macroeconomic imbalances were reduced during the years following initial reforms, but private investment failed to recover as expected, although the overall investment level in the economy did rise after 1985 thanks to the public sector effort. While private investment remained flat at about 4 per cent of GDP, public investment increased from 3.5 per cent in 1985 to 8.4 per cent in 1989, largely financed by concessional official flows.
Private investment rates finally began to recover in 1990 (see figure VII.I)
but remain low in terms of their relative share in GDP (8.6 per cent in 1995), and it is still not clear whether high rates of private investment will be sustained in the future.
Besides their impact on the total volume of investment, the reforms also had an impact on the composition of capital formation in the private sector. As table VII.l shows, since 1990 private fixed investment has moved away from construction into machinery and equipment. Import liberalization seems to have encouraged greater imports of such goods, with tariffs on them being reduced to 5 per cent in January 1990 from an average level of 20 per cent.
Another dimension of the private investment upswing was the contribution of direct investment. Incentives aimed at foreign investors appear to have produced results: net inflows of foreign direct investment recovered during the first half of the 1990s from their very low or even negative levels in the 1980s.
Net foreign-direct-investment flows reached $140 million in 1995, up from $30 million in 1988, representing about 2 per cent of GDP or about one quarter of the private investment effort in the country. Most of that investment has gone into mining; the export processing zones, particularly gold jewelry;
and a number of agriculture sectors, especially soya cultivation, in the Santa Cruz region.
Notwithstanding the above and despite all the incentives, about half of the investment effort in the economy still came from the public sector in 1995, roughly the same share as it had contributed in 1980. Moreover, renewed pressures on the public budget have caused the Government to reduce public-sector investment since 1993. Consequently, 10 years after the initial reforms, gross fixed capital formation in Bolivia is only about 16 per cent of GDP.
The qlllestion of confidence in macroeconomic st:lbiilit.y The lack of a strong response from the private sector and the anaemic rates of growth registered by the Bolivian economy are very puzzling to those who monitor economic trends in that country. Afterall, Bolivia has been praised for being a model adjuster and its economy has shown signs of economic stability.
But while Bolivia's status as a model adjuster requires no comment, its apparent economic stability requires further analysis.
Two commonly used indicators of m.acroeconomic stability are changes in the consumer price index and changes in the real exchange rate.6 Price stability was achieved rather quickly, as noted above: inflation reached the singledigit level in 1993 and 1994, and stood at about 12 per cent in 1995, one of the lowest levels in Latin America. Changes in the exchange rate also point to stability: since the drastic devaluation of 1985 and the introduction of the new exchange regime, the real exchange rate has remained relatively stable and at a competitive level.
Nevertheless, such apparent stability rests on a fragile base. The fiscal balance has been difficult to control owing to increased current expenditures (mainly for personnel) and a very weak revenue base, a problem that has been intensified by tax evasion and inefficiencies in the tax collection system. Furthermore, Government revenues have been heavily dependent on the hydrocarbon sector. Thus, price reductions in 1992 on gas exports to Argentina meant less funds for the Bolivian Treasury and a rise in the deficit.7 The deficit of the non-financial public sector had declined from 7 per cent of GDP in 1987 to 3.7 per cent of GDP by 1991, but it climbed back to 6 per cent of GDPin 1993.
The fiscal deficit was cut back in 1994 and 1995, mostly as a result of cuts in public investment (see figure VII.l), which in the long run is a costly but unavoidable strategy.
In short, although the response of the Government to fiscal shocks has been to counter their impact, and although monetary policy has maintained a firm grip on domestic credit expansion, the economy remains very vulnerable in the perception of investors.
Evidence for that perception can be found in the financial sector. High interest rates are common in stabilization efforts, as credit conditions are tightened in order to curb demand and actual inflation falls faster than expected inflation. That phenomenon should be temporary, however, unless the authorities do not regain sufficient policy credibility.s Yet Bolivian real interest rates have been high for the past 9 years and remain so (see figure VII.2); moreover, most investments in the banking system are deposited in foreign currency (dollars)
and placed at very short term, a further indication of the lack of confidence in policy sustainability.
The lack of confidence in the Bolivian economy in spite of policy consistency may be explained in terms of the political economy of the reforms. Although the Government has shown its de facto commitment to price stability and restructuring of the economy, it has faced strong opposition, and by introducing changes to or reversing measures already adopted, has unintentionally sent wrong signals about the continuity of such measures. Moreover, the negotiation process on the adoption of the reforms has been far from smooth. Many reforms have required a long time to be approved by the Congress, and delays in implementation have occurred. A case in point is the privatization programme:
although announced 1990, its legal instrument was approved only in April 1992, its implementation has been slow and marred by controversies, and it was temporarily interrupted in June 1993. Finally, the fine tuning of the economy has also taken its toll in the maintenance of uncertainty. For example, changes introduced to the tax system as well as to the export promotion incentive system may have contributed to the "wait-and-see" attitude that private investors have shown.9 Overall, there is apparently no consensus among the major political parties on the general lines that the economy is supposed to be following. Every time elections approach, there is much uncertainty about whether reforms adopted to date will remain in place after a new administration takes over. Businessmen representing some of the major Bolivian private companies have articulated that viewpoint in a recent survey, stating that the lack of policy consensus or what they termed an agreed State policy (po[(ticas de Estado) is detrimental to the establishment of a favourable investment climate.

Even if uncertainties related to macroeconomic policy implementation were minimized and full credibility restored, Bolivia would probably still be disappointed in the level of private investment, because it faces considerable structur·
al constraints that tend to reduce expected profits and thus investment activity.
Financial markets, in particular, are poorly developed in Bolivia. Most of the credit to the private sector is extended through the banking system, which is composed of a limited number of institutions. Interest rates charged are quite high (see figure VII.2), not only because of restrictive monetary policy but also owing to the oligopolistic character of the sector. In addition, administrative inefficiencies have led to large margins being charged. Credit is usually restricted to a number of preferred clients and is legally subject to the presentation of real estate guarantees. Most small farmers and businessmen thus do not have access to credit. In fact, loans are extended on the basis of very poor or incomplete financial information on the borrower, since guarantees are perceived to provide enough of a hedge against eventual default. Hence, credit is not necessarily given on the basis of the soundness of the project to be financed and the banking system carries a very weak loan portfolio; indeed, two major Bolivian banks recently collapsed. An additional problem is that most deposits are in foreign currency and are overwhelmingly placed in shortterm instruments. Consequently, only a small share of the loans extended by banks are long-term (13 per cent in 1994). The deposit profile also compels banking institutions to maintain a high degree of liquidity, again helping to push loan rates up. In addition, Bolivia's hyper-inflation led to a contraction in domestic saving, which has started only a slow recovery since 1988, and that reduced supply of savings may be another factor underlying the persistence of high interest rates. All in all, the lack of available finance and high interest rates compromise the expected profitability of a given investment: anticipated rates of return would have to be quite high to justify borrowing.
Infrastructure is also rather poor, which increases costs and compromises the competitiveness of enterprises serving either domestic or foreign markets.
The transport system, for instance, is poorly developed and poorly maintained, and moreover is concentrated in the economically decaying mining areas of the altiplano, while the most dynamic sectors located in the valleys and lowlands are not adequately served.
Public investment in recent years has emphasized public enterprises, particularly enterprises in the mining and hydrocarbon sector that have direct implications for foreign-exchange earnings. Investment in infrastructure actually declined from 40 per cent of total public investment in 1987 to 35 per cent in 1990, although it increased somewhat to reach 37 per cent in 1994. Besides physical infrastructure, the human infrastructure of Bolivia is not competitive.
The lack of an adequately trained and healthy labour force compromises the productivity and profitability of investment. Given the resources available to the Treasury and the fact that until recently the Government focus was elsewhere, human resources have been poorly developed in Bolivia. 12 Finally, as a domestic market Bolivia also holds limited attraction for investors. Though hard-working and enterprising, most of the 7 million people that comprise the Bolivian population are poor: 70 per cent of the country's households were classified as poor in the 1992 Census. In addition, with GDP
growing slowly Bolivia is not a very dynamic market. About 50 per cent of the labour force is engaged in small-scale activity in the informal sector (retail trade, self-employment, family business, domestic services and wage employees of small business). The manufacturing sector (about 14 per cent of GDP) is .
dominated by small producing units that have less than 15 employees, located in the food processing, textiles and garment sectors, the output of which is mostly channeled to the domestic market.
In other words, with most economic activities other than mining restricted by the small domestic market and with inadequate physical and human infrastructure and credit, few sectors of the Bolivian economy have been seen as a promising opportunity for private investment.

The Administration that took office in August 1993 sought to change the above-mentioned stagnation. Its strategy was given in the Plan de todos (Plan for all). Of particular relevance for the present chapter are the Plan's programmes for the capitalization and privatization of public enterprises, decentralization and pension reform.
The Capitalization Law (Ley de Capitalizaci6n) was designed to attract large-scale investments and increase efficiency in six major State enterprises through the injection of new equity capital and technology, 13 which, inter alia, would begin to address the infrastructure problem.
What distinguishes the new capitalization programme from traditional privatization is that it envisages financial resources not being paid to the Treasury but being invested directly in the company. While the private investors - the so called strategic partners - would have complete management control over the company, they would only have up to 50 per cent ownership of the enterprise.
The remaining 50 per cent, belonging to' the State, would be divided up and transferred to the individual pension accounts of all Bolivians who had reached legal majority (18 years) by December 1995. In parallel with the capitalization process, the Government also envisaged reactivating its privatization programme, so that it would transfer the remaining public enterprises, which are smaller than the six mentioned above and total about 180 companies, to the private sector.
The magnitude of the proposed change cannot be easily grasped. It required amendments to the Constitution, the design of a new regulatory system for all sectors concerned, and the introduction of specific sectoral legislation, including revisions to the taxing system. By December 1995, four of the six enterprises mentioned above had been capitalized, with the remaining two scheduled for capitalization in mid-1996. The programme is expected to channel to the Bolivian economy a flow of investment equivalent to 30 per cent of CDP during the next 7 years,14 which may boost economic activity with the additional spending it sets in motion domestically; the long-term benefit, however, will be the improved goods and services and the more effective infrastructure that the programme is expected to create.
Difficulties in the realm of human infrastructure are to be addressed by the decentralization programme, which will guarantee a minimum amount of investment in social sectors. The centrepiece of decentralization is the Popular Participation Law (Ley de Participaci6n Popular), which transfers to the municipalities the responsibility for administering, maintaining and renovating the infrastructures of education, health, local roads, irrigation systems and sports.
It also establishes a new fiscal revenue sharing system through which 20 per cent of national tax revenues are to be transferred to the municipalities, in proportion to the number of their respective inhabitants. Furthermore, the Law specifies that at least 90 per cent of such resources must be allocated to public investment.
The pension reform programme aims to raise the coverage rate of the Bolivian pension system (only 5 per cent of the population are currently covered)
and improve old age benefits. The programme also aims to promote an increase in the domestic saving effort and, by amassing a considerable amount of resources, to contribute to the development of a capital market in the country.
The pension reform programme was largely inspired by Chilean reforms.
The current pay-as-you-go system is to be replaced by an individually capitalized and contribution-determined system that is to be privately administered.
Private pension administrators will also manage the accounts that will be created from the resources arising from the capitalization process discussed above. Access to the funds in such accounts will be allowed only when the beneficiary reaches age 60, as they are intended to provide an extra economic support for old age. Resources from the capitalization process that would feed such accounts have been estimated to total about $1 billion, representing about 18 per cent of CDP in 1994.

Cote d'Ivoire has known periods of investment boom and bust, but since the late 1970s, it has mainly experienced a bust period. While buffeted by a volatile international economy, like so many other developing countries, Cote d'Ivoire, as a member of the franc zone, had a special constraint on adjustment (as well as special benefits), namely its commitment to maintain the exchange rate at a fixed parity with the French franc. As with any other fixed exchange rate arrangement, in normal times it is perceived as a pillar of stability and a basis for confidence and for investment decisions. But when the exchange rate is seen to have become fundamentally misaligned and when correcting relative prices without changing the exchange rate is not politically feasible, fixed parity becomes a millstone around the neck of the policy maker, which was the case in Cote d'Ivoire by 1993. Thus, when the CFA franc was devalued in January 1994, it was perceived not just as a necessary adjustment of an economic parameter but as a break with the past and an opening to a more growthenhancing economic strategy.
Between 1960 and 1980 - the period of the Ivorian "miracle" - GDP grew about 7 per cent annually. A number of exogenous shocks, however, triggered a decline in economic performance in the late 1970s. Prices of cocoa and coffee - Cote d'Ivoire's main exports - started to decline in 1978 after reaching a record high in 1977. Large current account and budget deficits developed quickly, exceeding 10 per cent of GDP in the late 1970s and early 1980s. For~
eign borrowing increased, and the total debt stock rose from about $1 billion in 1974 to nearly $9 billion in 1982. With higher interest rates in the early 1980s, total debt service payments reached 54 per cent of exports of goods and services in 1982. The economic situation was clearly not sustainable.
Starting in the late 1970s the Government implemented a number of reform measures to alleviate the impact of those external shocks and restore macroeconomic balance. However, it did not make the standard adjustment measure of changing the parity of the exchange rate, which was fixed to the French franc as part of the franc zone. IS Instead, the Government had. to rely only on fiscal, monetary and wage policies. The budget and current account deficits were eliminated by the mid-1980s, and growth resumed, although there is no agreement on the relative contribution to that recovery of policies and exogenous factors, such as the return of good rainfall after a severe drought in 1983, the depreciation of the French franc against the United States dollar, which indirectly depreciated the CFA franc, and a recovery in commodity prices in the mid-1980s.
After the recovery of GDP in 1985 and 1986, the economy began a long recession in 1987, which was mainly prompted by three exogenous events: the decline of the terms of trade by 28 per cent between 1987 and 1993, the appreciation of the French franc against the United States dollar after 1985, and the sharp devaluation of the currencies of Ghana and Nigeria, which made Cote d'Ivoire relatively less competitive.
As a result, the real effective exchange rate - the trade-weighted average exchange rate corrected for inflation differences with its trading partners became overvalued. In other words, despite a fixed exchange rate vis-a.-vis the French franc, Cote d'Ivoire currency depreciated in real effective terms by 29 per cent between 1980 and 1985, and then appreciated by one third between 1986 and 1990. Double-digit current account and budget deficits re-emerged in 1987 and 1991, respectively.
Adjustment efforts this time were clearly unsuccessful. At first, the Government viewed the terms-of-trade fall as temporary, and producer prices for Macroeconomic ad;jm;tm~ent cycles coffee and cocoa were not lowered until 1989. With foreign-exchange earnings scarce, the Government announced in June 1987 that it would stop interest payments on external debt to official and commercial creditors. To try to raise more tax revenue, a number of indirect taxes were raised during 1987 and 1988, particularly on imports, which was counter to adjustment objectives. The revenue from fiscal measures was disappointing, however, and payment arrears mounted. By 1987, the Government's capital expenditures were already reduced to 3.9 per cent of GDP, down from 23 per cent in 1978, and attempts to cut nominal civil service salaries set off waves of strikes and other social unrest, especially in 1990.
The commodity boom of the mid-1970s fueled a sharp increase in public investment in C6te d'Ivoire (see figure VII.3). The Government launched a large public investment programme for the period 1976-1980, part of which was financed by increased revenues from cocoa and coffee, but more than 50 per cent was financed by foreign loans. Public fixed investment thus rose from 8 per cent of GDP in 1973 to 18 per cent in 1978.19 Public investment mainly consisted of large agricultural (such as sugar) and infrastructural projects.
After the collapse of coffee and cocoa prices in 1978, however, public investment had to be reduced. In fact, the cost of reducing fiscal expenditures during the adjustment period was mainly borne by public investment, although the cuts were not implemented swiftly enough to pull in the burgeoning deficits. In any event, public fixed investment fell to 7 per cent of GDP by 1985, and remained at about that level until 1988, after which it dropped to about 4 per cent of GDP into the 1990s.
Private investment also collapsed after 1978: private fixed investment declined from 22 per cent of GDP in 1978 to 5 per cent in 1984 and stayed between 4 and 6.5 per cent of GDP during the period 1985-1993, a fall so steep that it resulted in net disinvestment. A number of factors contributed to the decline of private investment.2o First, the economic recession reduced domestic demand, lessening the need for the expansion of capacity. The fall in public investment might also have been a factor. 21 In part, however, they both declined as a result of the same exogenous factors.
Second, and related to the first factors, between 1980 and 1984 the profitability of private firms collapsed. The return on permanent capital declined from a positive 7 per cent in 1980 to a negative 12 per cent in 1984. The drop in the return on equity was even more dramatic, falling from a positive 13 per cent in 1980 to a negative 145 per cent in 1984. After 1985, profitability was very volatile.
Third, large payment arrears by the Government" reaching 18 per cent of GDP by 1989, hindered private investment.Franc Zone membership limits Government borrowing from the Central Bank and bars monetary financing of the fiscal deficit. Hence, when the Government runs a fiscal deficit, accumulation of payment arrears is the only option once possibilities for borrowing abroad or from commercial banks are exhausted. Such arrears meant that the domestic private sector was not being paid, which seriously affected not only its liquidity but also its confidence.
Fourth, limited supplies and high costs of credit curtailed private investment.
Several surveys conducted before the devaluation pointed to finance as one of the most important constraints on investment, even among large firms.
Real interest rates on loans were in double digits between 1984 and 1993 (except for the period 1986-1988). Credit to the private sector was restricted because the regional central bank annually sets overall credit ceilings for each member country, and the share of net domestic credit going to the Government increased from 6 per cent in 1981 to 29 per cent in 1993. Moreover, Cote d'Ivoire suffered from capital flight during the 1980s and early 1990s, which was seen in falling domestic and rising foreign bank deposits.Compounding all this was the near collapse of the financial system at the end of the 1980s.
Banks suffered from payment arrears of the Government and public enterprises and declining deposits, and in addition were not adequately supervised.
Devaluation In the early 1990s, it became increasingly clear that economic adjustment was not succeeding under the model that had guided policy since the end of the Second World War. Thus, a devaluation from 50 CFA francs per French franc to 100 CFA francs per French franc was announced on 11 January 1994.
Several policy measures were taken following the devaluation, so that for the first time a fully comprehensive approach could be attempted.
First of all, inflation had to be contained since the devaluation itself raised tradable goods prices immediately. Monetary policy was quickly tightened,z5 prices of a number of basic goods were temporarily frozen and subsidized, certain indirect taxes were reduced, and the nominal increase in the base wage of the civil service was limited to 10 per cent for 1994. As a result, after rising steeply in early 1994, the monthly inflation rate slowed down later in the year, so that the increase in consumer prices was limited to 26 per cent for 1994 as a whole, and it slowed further to an estimated 8 per cent in 1995 despite the lifting of price controls. The real effective exchange rate declined by 30 per cent between 1993 and August 1995, but that gain could have been larger were it not for the appreciation of the French franc against the United States dollar.
Reductions of the value-added tax, petroleum taxes, tariffs and other taxes were offset by the reintroduction of export taxes on coffee and cocoa, resulting in smaller budget deficits and even primary balance surpluses for 1994 and 1995. The improvement in the fiscal situation has allowed the Government to clear arrears and increase public investment. Capital expenditures rose from 10 per cent of total expenditures in 1993 to 17 per cent in 1994, and were planned to rise to 25 per cent by 1997. And by July 1995, domestic arrears had been significantly reduced; they are expected to be eliminated by the end of 1996. Total external debt arrears were reduced from $4.1 billion at the end of 1993 to $1.1 billion at the end of 1995, partly due to aid from donors. Cote d'Ivoire received substantial debt relief after the devaluation, which helped to check the rise in debt service payments in terms of local currency.Z6 In short, many of the factors that had shaken the private sector were being alleviated.
Structural reforms also gained new momentum after the devaluation. A privatization law as well as new labour, mining and investment codes were adopted, and non-tariff barriers were reduced. In addition, reforms of the agricultural marketing system were announced in August 1995. Producer prices will no longer be guaranteed to farmers but will only serve as guidelines, and export contracts will be awarded by a computer-based competitive bidding system.
The Government's stabilization fund will therefore lose its monopoly. Rice imports were liberalized in early 1995, and privatization of, for instance, the rubber and palm oil industry has commenced.
The supply response to the devaluation was generally positive but still moderate in 1994. GDP grew 1.8 per cent in 1994, the first rise in GDP since 1986. In 1995, the recovery spread to virtually all sectors of the economy;
GDP is estimated to have increased by 6.5 per cent. Industrial output and construction expanded strongly in 1995, and capacity utilization increased from 76 per cent in 1993 to 86 per cent in the second quarter of 1995. Domestic demand is increasing, particularly as a result of rising purchasing power in rural areas. Exports also increased both to the developed market economies and to the other franc zone countries, where imports from the European Union have been more expensive since the devaluation.

The devaluation, related reforms and the stimulus from international commodity prices have together raised prospects as well as output itself, stimulating investment, although the increase in investment was rather small in 1994 as a result of the fall in demand and uncertainty surrounding the impact of the devaluation. Investors were generally described as having a "wait and see"
attitude. None the less, investment increased from 9.3 per cent of GDP in 1993 to 12.5 per cent of GDP in 1994.
Preliminary estimates show that investment strengthened further in 1995, triggered by higher capacity utilization and by improved domestic economic prospects and regional and other export possibilities. In a small informal survey conducted in Abidjan in 1995, companies were optimistic about the long-term economic perspectives, and half of them planned investment for 1995, mostly for expanding capacity, while an even greater percentage planned to invest in 1996.
Foreign direct investment (FDI) is also increasing, in particular in energy, mining and privatized State-owned enterprises. FDI had fluctuated but never collapsed during the worst years of the 1980s, perhaps reflecting confidence in the guaranteed convertibility at a fixed parity with the French franc: investment in oil, gas and electricity was expected to amount to CFAF 80 billion in 1995. Several foreign firms are also involved in the exploration and development of the country's mineral deposits. Moreover, as the privatization programme accelerates, FDI is expected to increase in such areas as agro-industry and telecommunications.
The Government is implementing several measures to encourage investment in order to increase the share of investment in GDP to 20 per cent by 2000, of which 14 percentage points would represent private investment. The new investment and mining codes are specifically designed to simplify procedures and accelerate the approval process. To that end, the Centre de promotion des investissements en Cote d'Ivoire was established in 1995 to act as a "one-stop shop". The new codes include several incentives, such as tax holidays and guarantees, and the Government is also planning to provide a range of tax incentives to increase local processing of primary commodities. For example, only 13 per cent of the cocoa it produces is processed in Cote d'Ivoire; the goal is to increase that figure to 50 per cent by 2000.
It appears that, as usual, the increase in investment has been mostly financed with retained earnings or other internal funds, and more funds have become available from exports as a result of the devaluation and the rise in international commodity prices. Indeed, the above"mentioned informal survey in Abidjan confirmed that investments in 1994 and 1995 were largely financed by retained earnings and depreciation provisions.The amount of credit extended to the private sector declined from CFAF 896 billion at the end of 1993 to CFAF 686 billion at the end of September 1994, but recovered to surpass the end-1993 level by November 1995. Lending increased only slowly despite a significant rise in demand and time deposits in commercial banks after the devaluation - on the order of CFAF 426 billion between the end of 1993 and November 1995. The increase in liquidity was largely caused by the return of flight capital, some of which might also have financed investment directly.
The slow expansion in private credit despite the rapid increase in liquidity might be explained by the uncertainty generated by the devaluation and the weak financial situation of some banks, making them particularly risk-averse;D
so that the reduction of the discount rate by the regional central bank by 6 percentage points between June 1994 and June 1995 has not been translated into equivalent cuts in interest rates on loans.
Several initiatives have been taken in the financial sector, in part to overcome such impediments to private financing for private investment. The Banque ouest-africaine de developpement (BOAD) had two bonds issues in 1995 to abs~rb some of the excess liquidity into investment. In addition, BOAD and the European Investment Bank established at the end of 1994 the Fonds de Garantie des Investissements Prives en Afrique de l'Ouest, with a number of donor countries and regional private banks also participating. The aim of the fund is to guarantee 50 per cent of medium-to-long-term loans given by banks to the private sector. Moreover, a number of investment funds have been created by such bodies as the World Bank and BOAD. Finally, France is providing guarantees for bonds issued by banks to raise long-term capital.
Finance for investment by small enterprises, however, remains difficult to obtain, in particular since the liquidation of five small development banks in the late 1980s and early 1990s.

From the early 1960s to the mid-1980s, the Government of Tunisia intervened extensively in the economy by controlling prices, production, credit and investment. Investment was high, and output grew by 6 per cent per year.
Indeed, one could argue that during that period, the foundations were created for the successful response of the economy to the adjustment policies that followed the balance-of-payments crisis of 1986.
That crisis triggered a policy reorientation. The Government liberalized many facets of the economy while restoring macroeconomic stability. During the post-1986 period, Tunisia also underwent a political transition to democracy, which contributed to political stability and reinforced business confidence in the Government's economic policy. Those economic and political reforms contributed to a general improvement in economic performance, a significant change in the structure of the economy and a revival of investment, although investment remains below historical averages.

During the 1960s, when the Government embarked upon an import-substitution strategy, industrialization - and hence investment - was mainly driven by public enterprises. Between 1962 and 1971, 78 per cent of gross domestic fixed investment (GDFI) by enterprises took place in public enterprises32 and public enterprises dominated export activity. However, the Government implicitly encouraged the private sector and never discouraged it. Up to the mid1980s, investment was very much under Government control by means of various investment codes, licensing and regulations: law 69-35 of 1969 stated that any investment had to obtain Government approval. The code also involved several fiscal, financial and other incentives, including the granting of monopoly power, which were in principle not discriminatory between sectors.
Between 1972 and 1974, a number of policies and institutions were initiated to stimulate exports by the private sector. A number of institutions, such as the Centre de Promotion des Exportations and Agence Fonciere Industrielle, were created in the early 1970s. In 1972, specific investment incentives for the promotion of exports were implemented, and in the 1980s various investment codes and regulations were adopted that - in contrast to the 1969 code did discriminate between sectors. Investment in exports, tourism and lagging regions were particularly favoured.
Until the early 1980s, the volume and direction of credit and interest rates were very much under the control of the Government as well. For example, banks were required to lend 43 per cent of their total deposits (excluding foreign currency deposits of non-residents and convertible dinar deposits) in the form of medium- and long-term loans, 25 per cent in public sector bonds and 18 per cent for the private sector and certain public enterprises. Moreover, credit was controlled through ceilings on rediscounting. However, credit for certain activities, such as export financing, was not limited. Interest rates were subsidized either by the Governments's budget or by the preferential rediscount of the Central Bank.
Tunisia has had a rather well-developed banking system,33 and aside from retained earnings, finance for investment mainly came from commercial banks during the 1960s and 1970s.Until the mid-1980s, banks were able to remain profitable partly because the rediscount rate of the Central Bank was lower than the lending rate. But profitability decreased between the mid-1970s and the early 1980s. Banks had suffered from negative real interest rates, controls on asset composition and credit controls; according to one estimate, nonperforming loans amounted to 20 per cent of their collective portfolio at the end of 1988.
Investment during the 1960s and 1970s was also encouraged by an overvalued exchange rate, which made the import of capital goods cheaper, and low tariffs (less than 10 per cent on average) on intermediate and equipment imports. Non-tariff barriers and import controls, however, were extensive in the 1960s; they were relaxed (but not abolished) in the 1970s.
The above-mentioned policies were successful. Thus, in the two and a half decades up to 1986, investment was relatively high in Tunisia and GDP grew on average by 6 per cent annually. GDFI rarely fell below 30 per cent of GDP
(both at constant prices), with public investment usually accounting for one half to two thirds of GDFI (see figure VII.4). More importantly, the structure of the economy changed. In the 1960s, 83 per cent of GDFI in the textile sector was in public enterprises and 17 per cent in private enterprises; in the 1970s, those percentages were reversed. Textiles showed the most significant shift, but in all sectors except chemicals a similar change took place, reflecting a division of labour between the private and the public sector in which the public sector focused on capital-intensive and technologically advanced industries and the private sector on the more labour-intensive and less technologically advanced sectors. In effect, the number of private firms doubled during the 1970s, even if firms producing only for export markets are excluded.Thus, the share of the manufacturing sector increased from 7 per cent of GDP in the early 1960s to 15 per cent of GDP in the mid-1980s. The structure of trade changed even more dramatically. The share of manufacturing exports in total merchandise exports increased from about 19 per cent in the late 1960s to 45 per cent in 1985, and the share of textile exports in total merchandise exports increased from 2 per cent in 1970 to 21 per cent in 1978.

During the first half of the 1980s, export revenues from petroleum and phosphates declined, as prices fell and oil reserves dwindled. Debt-service payments rapidly increased, swelling the current account deficit and culminating in a crisis in mid-1986. Foreign exchange reserves dropped to a few days of imports, which triggered a comprehensive structural adjustment programme supported by the Bretton Woods institutions. Macroeconomic stability was restored, the currency was devalued, and prices, current account foreignexchange transactions, investment, trade and interest rates were all substantially liberalized. Other areas that underwent reform included the tax system, the financial sector and State-owned enterprises.
Since 1986, economic performance has improved, although GDP growth has been slightly lower than its historical average between 1987 and 1995, partly because of a number of droughts and a drop in tourism revenues in 1991 owing to the Gulf War?7 The inflation rate, never really high, declined by a few percentage points.But the budget deficit was reduced from over 7 per cent of GDP in 1986 to about 2 per cent in 1994, and the value of merchandise exports increased from $1.8 billion in 1986 to $5.3 billion in 1995, with their volume increasing over the same period by about 50 per cent after a monotonic decline from 1980 to 1985 of 24 per cent. Partly because of the increase in exports, the current account deficit (before official transfers), which amounted to about 8 per cent of GDP during 1982 to 1986, was transformed into a surplus in 1988, after which the deficit averaged 5 per cent of GDP. External debt-servicing payments fell from 28 per cent of exports of goods and services in 1987 to 18 per cent in 1994, owing to the rise in exports earnings, so that Tunisia never had to seek to reschedule its debt-service payments.
Significant economic reforms affecting investment have been introduced since the mid-1980s. The first phase of the trade liberalization programme (1986-1988) focused on raw materials, semi-processed materials, spare parts and capital goods. During the first half of the 1980s, trade restrictions were tightened in response to the looming current-account crisis and by 1986 94 per cent of the tariff lines were on the restricted list, requiring an annual import authorization, semi-annual import license or import card.
Then the reforms began, and although between the mid-1980s and the early 1990s, total charges (tariffs and para-tariffs) on imports of machinery and equipment slightly increased, non-tariff barriers were significantly reduced.
The volume of equipment imports then rose rapidly.
Starting in 1987, investment codes have been significantly liberalized. Sectoral investment codes were revised, and prior approval was abolished for nearly all investments that did not request incentives, and was replaced with a registration obligation. Targeting and simplified procedures were also improved. In December 1993, the Chamber of Deputies approved a new unified investment code, covering all sectors with the notable exception of mining, energy and finance; the new code harmonized incentives and reduced discrimination against certain sectors, such as manufacturing production for the domestic market. Incentives that were previously mainly aimed at export promotion and regional development were extended to such areas as environmental protection, the promotion of technology, research and development and energy savings, the development of entrepreneurship and the development of human capital. The new code and an additional decree reinforced the principle of freedom to invest. Investment has been substantially deregulated, except for certain activities, mostly services, such as transportation and restaurants.
The new code is also more open to foreign direct investment (FDI), demonstrating the importance that the Government is attaching to attracting FDI. In addition, foreign portfolio investment was partially liberalized in June 1995, and the Agency for the Promotion of Foreign Investment was created in July 1995. In fact, even before those recent measures, fiscal and financial incentives for FDI in Tunisia were among the most attractive among 53 developing and developed countries covered by a survey conducted in the late 1980s.
In addition, free-trade zones are being created, one of which became operational in late 1995.
With the liberalization of investment came the liberalization of credit and interest rates as well. Liberalization of the financial sector started in the early 1980s, but reforms only became comprehensive with the structural adjustment programme of 1986, which actually focused on the financial sector. Already in January 1987, interest rates were partially liberalized, although banks, under the aegis of Association Professionelle de Banques, immediately colluded to fix interest rates. About a year later, prior approval requirements for loans, rediscounting and all refinancing facilities, except in priority sectors, were abolished.
Preferential interest rates were increased, and the number of activities eligible for preferential credit was reduced in 1990 and 1992.40 By 1994, financial reforms had significantly progressed, thanks to the introduction of several new financial instruments since 1988; the issuance of new prudential regulation and the strengthening of Central Bank supervision in 1991; the adoption of a new banking law in 1994 that increased the competition between development and commercial banks; and the removal of the last significant interest control in 1994: a cap on the spread of lending rates over the money market rate.
It is perhaps too early to assess the full impact of the above-mentioned financial sector reforms. Nonetheless, some observations are warranted. First, lending rates do not seem to have had a major impact on investment: both have increased steadily since 1987. Second, the extension of domestic credit, excluding net credit to the central Government, more than doubled between 1986 and 1994 but decreased from 64 per cent of GDP in 1986 to 60 per cent in 1994. Moreover, the share of total loans going to public enterprises remained basically the same: it was 17 per cent in 1989 and 16 per cent in 1993.41 Third, the profitability and operating costs of banks for the period 19871993 were broadly in line with those of banks in OECD countries. Finally, there is a danger that the liberalization of the financial sector will negatively affect the amount of credit made available to small and medium-sized enterprises.
Hence, publicly supported funds will play an increasingly important role in providing financing for such enterprises since they lack access to formal credit.

In 1988, total GDFI reached its lowest point since 1960 at 22 per cent of GDP. During the first half of the 1980s, the Government had reduced public investment in response to the deteriorating economic situation.Private investment fell as well, as a result of the increasing policy uncertainty and weak domestic demand. The increase in private investment started already in 1988 and public investment followed in 1989, pushing GDFI from 22 per cent of GDP in 1988 to 31 per cent in 1993 (see figure VII.4). FDI increased also but remains moderate outside the energy sector, despite generous incentives, combined with current account convertibility of the Tunisian dinar, macroeconomic and political stability, and the easy transfer of invested capitaL44 Investment ratios remain below the level of the 1960s and 1970s, but there is some indication that the efficiency of investment is improving. Thus, the five-year incremental capital-output ratio declined from a high of 10 in 1987 to 6 in 1992.
An important aspect of any adjustment programme is the restructuring of the economy, in which, of course, investment plays a crucial role. The diversification of the economy after 1986 away from traditional export products is particularly notable, in part because it reduces vulnerability to terms-of-trade shocks. The share of manufacturing exports in total merchandise exports increased from 45 per cent in 1985 to 75 per cent in 1993, with the share of textiles and machinery and equipment in 1985 exports increasing from 20 and 4 per cent, respectively, to 40 and 9 per cent, respectively, in 1992 exports. On the down side, energy, phosphates and derivatives accounted for 46 per cent of total merchandise exports in 1986 but only 15 per cent in 1994.
It is not clear how large a direct effect liberalization has had on investment;
the growth of investment is probably as much related to general macroeconomic and political stability and the presence of other necessary conditions, such as export capabilities, infrastructure and an educated labour force, so that, striking as the post-1986 changes are, they were by no means unexpected.
Tunisia has expanded its infrastructure and improved educational attaintment substantially since independence in 1956, and it has had a long history of providing incentives for exporters and the private sector, going back at least to the early 1970s. The increase in exports in the 1970s was almost as dramatic as it was in the second half of the 1980s. The incentives contained in the investment codes, however, appear to have had an effect on the allocation of invest ment; combined with export promoting institutions, they have contributed to change in the structure of exports and to their rapid increase.

Chile can be categorized as a developing economy that has achieved a relatively high level of investment in the 1990s. The ratio of investment to GDP
has been increasing since 1985 (see table VII.2). Together with exports, investment is one of the most dynamic components of aggregate demand in the Chilean economy. Private investment is the leading component of total investment.
The Chilean investment performance is in clear contrast with that of most Latin American economies. What has made the difference for Chile?
The improved environment for private investment in Chile in the 1990s is the outcome of a long and difficult transition process to achieve sustained macroeconomic and political stability while undertaking deep structural reforms. That process, which began earlier in Chile than in the rest of Latin America, was consolidated by the return to democracy in 1990 and by the recent attention to the social costs of reforms. After almost two decades of implementing, sequencing and fine-tuning liberalization reforms, the longawaited rewards are emerging.
In July 1995, Tunisia and the European Union (EU) signed a trade and cooperation accord which will, inter alia, create a free trade zone for industrial goods over a 12-year period. Under the 1976 agreement, which the new agreement will replace, Tunisia already had largely free access to the EU for industrial goods. EU firms will now have greater access' to the Tunisian market.
One study estimated that unless restructured, a third of the Tunisian industrial sector would fail and another third would face serious difficulties.
The Government is assisting the industrial sector in preparing for the increased competition, and an initial 100 firms have been selected for a pilot assistance programme, the total cost of which is estimated at $2.4 billion over the next five years. Increased EU assistance and World Bank support is available for such restructuring. But in addition, FDI is considered crucial, and could be stimulated by the agreement because it reduces the likelihood that reforms will be reversed.On the other hand, the agreement gives Tunisia little additional access to theEU, and considering its small market and relatively high transportation costs, firms might as well choose to invest in the EU.
For instance, unit labour costs, energy and transportation costs, and illiteracy are still relatively high compared with its competitors, and might be factors in the low level of non-energy FDI. The challenge is for Tunisian firms to rise and meet the competition.
In the early 1970s, a relatively inward-oriented and interventionist economic policy was discarded and an extreme laissez-faire policy was imposed by a new GovernmentY The economic strategy was based on a radically liberalized Growth strategy: a experiInent, then reform market economy model that placed excessive confidence in automatic market corrections and inflexible rules for money supply growth, leading to the implementation of policies that proved to be unsustainable. Trade liberalization was followed by the opening up of capital-account transactions within a context of an appreciating exchange rate. A consumption boom took pace, fed by cheap external credit and imported goods (as a result of the foreign exchange policy and the drastic lowering of import tariffs), which undermined national industry. 48 The trade balance thus deteriorated, while high domestic interest rates, as a consequence of the monetary policy, led to massive inflows of foreign capital and increased indebtedness of the economy, mainly of its private sector.
The vulnerability of the Chilean economy became evident in the early 1980s in the face of several external shocks: terms-of-trade shocks (higher oil prices and lower copper prices), the leap in real international interest rates and the end of foreign financial inflows. The economy collapsed in 1982, with GDP
contracting by 14 per cent and unemployment reaching 33 per cent in that year. The Government reacted to the crisis by adopting emergency measures (austere fiscal and wage policies), while rescheduling and guaranteeing private foreign debts. The exchange rate collapsed and was sharply devalued. The fixed nominal exchange rate policy was abandoned, and a steadyIreal depreciation of the currency was pursued. 
A structural adjustment programme was adopted in 1985. I t included a more expansionary macroeconomic policy intended to promote tHe recovery of output, employment, domestic saving and investment,while g~ining control over inflation and managing the exchange rate. 49 The country's growth strategy was now to be based on a major restructuring of its economy away from the copper industry and towards more diversified exports. 50 A flexible exchange rate within a crawling band was adopted and managed by a more autonomous Central Bank. Initially, it devalued the currency - aided by the international depreciation of the dollar - and then sought to avoid extreme currency appre ciation, which would have been adverse to export sectors. The effective exchange rate has indeed remained quite stable during the past 10 years51 (see figure VII.5).
Import tariffs, temporarily raised during the crisis, were reduced between 1985 and 1988. Those measures radically reoriented incentives in favour of non-traditional export sectors, which began to increase their efficiency through improved quality control and a more aggressive marketing strategy.Consequently, the reforms initiated in 1985, together with improvement of the Chilean terms of trade as international copper prices improved after 1987, contributed to the recovery of the economy.

Investment was very much affected by the crisis and declined in the early 1980s. The decline of private investment was more pronounced than that of public investment. Multilateral financing, the only significant source of foreign currency besides exports, supported some large public investment projects after the crisis.
The overall investment level in the economy recovered somewhat in the middle and late 1980s. Most of the investment effort in that period was foreign direct investment (FDI). Foreign investors had been attracted to Chile by the introduction of a more liberal mining code in 1983, which granted security of tenure to companies operating large concessions. Although policy makers realized how vulnerable Chile would be if its economic development were to be based solely on its mining sector, it was precisely the mining sector that had the capacity to attract foreign capital and help to build some momentum in the economy.Debt-equity swaps and privatization of some infrastructure service (for example, telecommunications) contributed to an expansion of investment during that period.
Private domestic investment took some more time to respond to the new environment. Limitations to higher investment included depressed demand conditions; diminished national saving due to the loss of foreign saving as a source of finance and the slow recovery by domestic private saving owing to the 1982 crisis; past experience with losses and bankruptcy during recessions;54 and low domestic savings until 1991. Furthermore, changes in policy orientation accompanying the democratization process were also a possibility, thus creating a great deal of uncertainty about the future of the economy. Those conditions changed in the 1990s.
The dramatic decline of unemployment and the parallel rise in wages may have increased the demand for investment to offset rising labour costs and expand capacity. Open urban unemployment was only 4 per cent in 1993 (it increased somewhat later), down from almost 12 per cent in 1987, while average real wages rose by 20 per cent during the period 1989-1995.
The peaceful political transition and the continuity of policy strategy in the 1990s had a positive effect on private investment, including both foreign direct investment and domestic investment. After the change to democracy in 1990, the new administration remained committed to the macroeconomic policy and management of the previous regime. The stable conditions of an open economy gave Chile the highest rating in terms of investors' confidence in Latin America.The private sector reacted positively to this and investment picked up.

An important component of the Chilean strategy has been fiscal and financial reforms pursued over a long period, which have had a positive impact on investment. The radical deregulation of the economy, a comprehensive round of privatization (1974-1978) imd the quick reduction of public deficits in the 1970s brought about a dramatic reduction of public intervention in the economy.
Moreover, a sustained practice of budget balancing yielded con~istent fiscal surplus during the period preceding the 1980s crisis. In fact, it was precisely the pursuit of a budget surplus - despite deteriorating ovefL"all social conditions - that allowed Chile to conduct the well-known reform of its social security system in 1981 from a pay-as-you-go system to a privately, managed, contribution-determined, pension system.Moreover, because the public sector was running a fiscal surplus, the savings accumulated in the new pension system could go completely into investment.
Thus, unlike the rest of Latin America, Chile entered its foreign crisis in the 1980s with a strong fiscal position but llll unmanageable private foreign debt,57 which allowed the public sector to rescue the debt-burdened private sector.
The 1982-1983 crisis had rendered insolvent many of the enterprises that were privatized in the late 1970s, and they were thus taken over by their local creditor banks. The latter, however, also fell into a dire financial situation owing to capital losses associated with the currency depreciation. Between 1982 and 1984, the official banking supervisory agency intervened in 14 banks and eight other financial institutions, lending them $9 billion.The ensuing debt, owed by ailing banks to the central bank, eased their recovery. By 1995, six banks still owed $4.5 billion, with a 40-year maturity for repayment.
As the treatment of the banking crisis highlighted, the public sector clearly affirmed its role in support of the private sector. Social demands, however, went basically unattended, despite the Government's notable emergency employment programme, which absorbed about 13 per cent of the Chilean labour force at the height of the economic crisis in 1983.59 Its costs, however, pale next to the central bank's rescue programme. At its peak, the employment programme cost 1.5 per cent of GDP, while the bailout of the private sector peaked at 5.8 per cent of GDP.
With the change to a democratic administration, the State has increased expenditure on social programmes and raised its investment in infrastructure, backed by additional revenues from a tax reform in 1990. The additional public expenditures the tax reform thus enabled are estimated to have a positive, crowding in, effect on private investment and social stability seemed more assured.

Chile's experiment with financial liberalization in the 1970s had attracted an abundance of foreign credit to the private sector through the intermediation of local banks. Banks lent those funds to private conglomerates - some linked to. the banks themselves - to finance the purchase of enterprises being priva tized and other investments, most in the non-tradeables sector of the economy (such as real estate). Some were of questionable quality, however; poor risk assessment and lack of proper regulation and supervision thus led to the deterioration of the banks' loan portfolios. When the Chilean peso was devalued and the local currency cost of foreign debt servicing soared, the financial system crashed. As noted above, the Government then bailed out the banking system.
Policy makers were henceforth more conscious of the volume and nature of capital inflows. Domestic financial regulation was reintroduced to avoid excessive financial concentration, and the seized banks were reprivatized by publicly offering their stock in the domestic market. Moreover, when foreign capital inflows started to come back in the late 1980s, the central bank sought to sterilize their impact on the domestic economy so as to avoid financial volatility, increased inflationary pressures and the appreciation of the currency,52 and a number of controls were imposed on them. However, high domestic interest rates still attract foreign capital inflows, which continue to cause some degree of upward pressure on the exchange rate. Additional capital controls were introduced in 1995 to discourage short-term speculative flows.
Domestic capital markets are burgeoning with the contribution of pension funds being managed by the Administradoras de Fondos de Pensiones (AFPs).
Given the nature of pension fund investing, this has boosted the supply of long-term project financing, which was very scarce in the past. Moreover, the recent Law 19415 allows institutional investors such as AFPs and insurance companies to buy equity shares in development projects. They may contribute to allocating up to $4 billion for investment in infrastructure. In sum, foreign finance is now playing a much smaller role in investment finance. Indeed, the restructured Chilean banks and other domestic firms themselves have been investing in neighboring countries (total Chilean investment abroad is estimated at about $5 billion).

As in other cases in which policy reforms since the late 1980s have been associated with strong economic growth, favourable external factors have been conducive to an increase in investment. Since the second half of the 1980s, foreign private finance has been available for placement in Chile on a steadier basis than it has for other Latin American economies. The improved access to foreign finance was bolstered by a substantial reduction in Chile's foreign indebtedness through pioneering debt-equity conversions of commercial bank debt and substantial prepayments of multilateral debt. Between 1985 and 1990, some $9.6 billion in foreign debt were retired through debt-equity swaps that often involved domestic investors bringing back funds from overseas, which contributed to finance privatization and reinforced the liberal environment for foreign direct investment.At the same time, indicators of external indebtedness declined as the debt overhang eased.
In addition to financial sector developments, declining international prices of capital goods are also having positive effects on the quantity and quality of investment in Chile in the 1990s. Additionally, favourable developments in the terms of trade since the late 1980s and an extremely positive export performance in the past years have supported the growth of foreign reserves while allowing for import growth. FDI originally boomed owing to the debt conversions and the mining projects, and more recently owing to the overall healthy conditions of an economy that offered considerable advantages and is likely to continue to do so in the coming years. Santiago is now seen as a low-risk financial, services and operations centre for transnational corporations investing in other South American countries.
In conclusion, the Chilean case shows the considerable advantage offered by the establishment of a competitive environment - as a result of the opening of the economy to ensure increases in productivity - and by intense reform, export orientation and sustained stability in increasing the efficiency and quantity of investment. With the stabilization of the economy, some predictability of the inflation rate and exchange rate has been possible, thus facilitating long-term planning. Import liberalization has created pressure to increase productivity and facilitated investment through a supply of less expensive inputs and capital goods. Given those favourable conditions and the continuous respect for the rules of the game by the Government, a virtuous cycle has settled in.

A new long-term economic development strategy stressing economic reform and macroeconomic stabilization was adopted in Indonesia following the plunge in world oil prices in 1986. The new strategy was aimed at economic diversification, and has brought about substantial structural change in the Indonesian economy over the past decade. Private investment has expanded particularly sharply in response to the restructuring of domestic economic incentives and macroeconomic stability as well as to the favorable international environment for investment in the region. The expansion of the manufacturing sector, in particular manufactured exports, has been the focus of much of the new investment. The present case study examines the rising trend of public and private investment in Indonesia since the early 1980s and the factors that have contributed to that trend.

Several years of economic instability in the early 1980s had a depressing effect on investment. Plunging oil and commodity prices significantly weakened the balance of payments and sparked a severe tightening of macroeconomic policy. Public investment declined substantially under fiscal restraints, while private investment stagnated. In the mid-1980s, however, Indonesia embarked on a new development strategy that emphasized liberalization and industrial diversification along with macroeconomic stabilization. That reorientation of stabilization policy was followed by a rapid recovery in investment.
The rate of fixed investment in current prices increased from an average of 24 per cent of GDP for 1983-1986 to 27 per cent in 1987-1994 (see table VII.3).
The revival of investment has been one of the most notable results of Indonesia's new development strategy. It has been underpinned by the sustained double digit annual growth in private investment in response to the reorientation of economic incentives in the system (discussed below) and an increase in aggregate savings. The increase in private fixed investment has outstripped that of public investment; private investment represented 18 per cent of GDP in 1994 compared to only 13 per cent in 1983 (see table VII.3).
The sectoral composition of private investment has also changed significantly since the early 1980s. The most salient feature of the reallocation of investment across industries has been the rapid growth of investment in labour-intensive and in many cases export-oriented manufacturing industries. There are several indicators of that shift: the rapid increase in manufacturing output, which grew at an annual average rate of 11 per cent between 1984 and 1993, almost double the growth rate of GDP; the sharp rise in the share of manufacturing output in GDP from 13 per cent to 21 per cent; the rise of non-oil exports from 32 to 75 per cent of total exports, and the increase in the share of manufactures in non-oil exports from 38 per cent in 1986 to 63 per cent in 1994.
Foreign direct investment (FDI) has increased significantly since the mid1980s, with inflows increasing nine fold between 1986 and 1994 (reaching $2 billion in 1994).66 Two thirds of FDI has been concentrated in manufacturing, and about 70 per cent of FDI projects have been in export-oriented sectors.
Public investment declined sharply from the early 1980s through 1986, largely because of the need to reduce government expenditure as part of macroeconomic adjustment programmes. Since 1988, the rate of public investment has averaged approximately 9 per cent of GDP (see table VII.3).
Investment in physical infrastructure, human resource development and the reduction of poverty has remained a priority in public investment. At the same time, there has been a significant decline in public investment in directly productive activities.
There was a positive trend in industrial productivity since total factor productivity (TFP) growth was significant - 2.2 per cent annually - between 1988 and 199J.69 There are indications that TFP growth was more substantial - 3.8 per cent annually - in the non-oil manufacturing sectors, particularly in the export-oriented industries, in the second half of the 1980s.7°
The reorientation of .l.OJIl~··teJ!·mdevelo]JmlelJ!t sltrategy For almost three decades, Indonesia has enjoyed a high level of political stability. In addition, the Government's record in economic management, including the priority it has traditionally placed on macroeconomic stability and long-term economic development since its establishment, have contributed to the credibility of its economic policies.Successful macroeconomic adjustment programmes followed the severe swings in terms of trade from oil and other commodity prices, which first rose steeply at the end of the 1970s and then dropped sharply in the early 1980s, after which oil prices plunged again in 1986. Both adjustment programmes involved sharp currency devaluation and contractionary macroeconomic policies. The 1986 policies included a devaluation of approximately 35 per cent against the dollar, monetary tightening and significant contraction of Government expenditure, including public investment. By undertaking those drastic adjustment programmes, however, the Government demonstrated its commitment to macroeconomic stability.
Aggregate data since the institution of those programmes is indicative of their success. Annual inflation has fluctuated within a relatively narrow range, between 5 and 12 per cent, since the late 1980s. Economic growth has also been sustained at a high rate, between 5 and 7.5 per cent annually. Supporting growth while limiting inflationary pressures has created highly favorable conditions for investment and a firm foundation for long-term policy.
Long-term economic development policies during the 1970s emphasized agricultural and rural development, the improvement of social conditions, human resource development, infrastructure and the expansion of industry.
The Government also significantly expanded its direct involvement in production, including public investment in heavy industry, petroleum and mining.
Those development efforts were supported by substantial earnings from oil exports; in fact, during the period of high oil prices, the production structure of the Indonesian economy became increasingly concentrated in oilrelated industries.
With the initial oil price decline at the beginning of the 1980s and its significant negative effect on Government revenues and the current account balance, the Government recognized the need for diversification of the economy.
However, it relied on import substitution policies and a continued strong role of Government to expand the manufacturing sector since the political consensus to implement major economic reforms did not yet exist.It was only after the plunge in oil prices in 1986 and its severe impact on the economy that the political will emerged to put in place development policies that departed radically from the past.
The new long-term economic development strategy was based on economic diversification, and was to be guided by reliance on the private sector and market mechanisms. Furthermore, Indonesia's integration with the international economy was to be greatly expanded. Programmes of extensive liberalization and reform have since been instituted in the domestic financial sector, the foreign trade sector, and in the regulations governing investment in domestic industries. Those programmes have tended to be complementary and supported by appropriate macroeconomic policies.
The implementation of liberalization and reform has followed a gradualist approach. On the one hand, that approach can be seen as contributing to the credibility of those policies since the positive results of each phase bolstered the sustainability of reform. On the other hand, distortions are still pervasive in the economy as a result of partial reforms and remain obstacles to improving economic efficiency.

Programmes of financial liberalization and reform were begun in 1983 but were intensified from the late 1980s onward. Those reforms expanded the financing available for private investment and reduced the cost of financing for the private sector. The cost of credit increased for the public sector, as subsidies and directed credit were scaled down or eliminated.
Initial measures were primarily focused on the liberalization of the financial sector, with the deregulation of interest rates, the elimination of central bank ceilings on commercial bank credit and the end of subsidies for the Stateowned bank. Those measures succeeded in significantly increasing the placement of private savings in the financial system and the extension of credit to the private sector. The growth in deposits was primarily in response to the swing to positive real deposit rates that occurred when interest rates were deregulated, and included the repatriation of funds that had flowed out during the macroeconomic shock in the early 1980s.
Much more far-reaching reforms have been implemented since 1988, which have succeeded in changing the structure of the financial system and significantly enhancing financial intermediation,77 including the opening of the system to private banks and a significant reduction in reserve requirements.In addition to the banking sector, capital markets have developed rapidly since 1987 and have become an important source of financing for large firms. Reform measures that brought this about included an increase in withholding tax on interest on time deposits, reduction in the costs of issuing new stock, permission for foreign purchases of up to 49 per cent of shares of listed stocks, a change in pension law to allow the investment of pension funds in the stock market and the privatization of the stock market in 1992.
Private savings in the banking system increased over 300 per cent between 1986 and 1990. The share of private sector loans rose from 30 per cent in the mid-1980s to 45 per cent in 1992, while the real growth of total bank loans averaged 15 to 20 per cent annually. Real lending rates declined significantly in 1987 with the easing of monetary policy and have subsequently maintained steady levels (see table VII.4). At the same time, real deposit rates rose as a result of the narrowing spread between real deposit and lending rates in response to growing competition in the banking sector.
Despite the above-mentioned reforms, the access of private investors to credit and capital has been very unevenly distributed. Private conglomerates, which dominate the private sector, grew rapidly and relied heavily on bank credit in the 1980s. More recently, the domestic and international capital markets have become important sources of financing. Although small firms have also benefitted from increased access to credit, they have remained largely dependent on retained earnings to finance investment.Those firms, particularly those in rural areas and including exporters, continue to experience difficulty in gaining access to credit.
The development of the financial sector is still in the early stages. Because of the lag in development of financial infrastructure - prudential regulation, accounting standards and business law - significant inefficiencies and instability persist in the sector, as reflected in the decline in the quality of bank portfolios in the early 1990s and incidents of bank failures, which have adversely affected efficiency in the allocation of financial resources to investment.

Since 1985, restrictions on domestic private investment have been greatly reduced as investment opportunities have been significantly expanded with the streamlining of the investment licensing system, the progressive elimination of monopolies and the opening up of industries to private investment. The growth of the financial sector has provided the capital necessary to exploit those new opportunities.
The response of private investment has been very strong, with the majority of domestic investment projects concentrated in export-oriented industries.sl Investment growth has been concentrated in private conglomerates that engage in highly diversified and transnational economic activities.s2 Investment growth in small enterprises, however, has lagged behind that of the large conglomerates.
Investment in large conglomerates can potentially be more efficient than investment in smaller firms. Because of their greater access to financial resources, conglomerates can exploit economies of scale and have a greater capacity for supporting large-scale investment. In addition, because of their higher level of technology and access to markets, they can also have a greater capability for absorbing new technology and better marketing know-how for competing internationally. However, they can also present obstacles to improving investment efficiency if they are protected from competition by administrative barriers to entry created by the Government or receive preferential treatment in access to Government contracts or financial support. Examples of such problems in Indonesia range from the creation of monopoly power in industries by the Government to bail-outs in the event of failure of large investment projects.
Another example is the preferential access of businesses within a conglomerate to credit from banks that are members of the same conglomerate;
while that practice could be justified by the lower transaction cost of such loans because of the lower cost of obtaining credit information on the borrower, it has also been found to have been based on financially unsound decisions and has contributed to defaults.

Exchange-rate policy, trade liberalization and foreign investment reforms have been key factors in raising investment in the export sector. The 35 per cent devaluation in 1986 drastically increased the ratio of prices of tradables to nontradables, reversing the decline in the profitability of the tradables sec tor.Since then, the managed floating rate system has succeeded in maintaining a competitive real effective exchange rate.
Trade reforms, which have been phased in since the mid-1980s, have reinforced the impact of exchange-rate policy. The liberalization of export licensing has significantly reduced the barriers to entry into the export sector. The institution of duty exemptions and drawbacks on imports of inputs for export production and across-the-board tariff reductions have lowered the costs of the export sector. The average tariff rate has been reduced from 37 per cent in 1985 to its current level of 15 per cent. The continued reduction of non-tariff barriers has also had a favorable impact on the cost of imported inputs. By the early 1990s, the proportion of domestic output covered by non-tariff barriers was reduced from 32 per cent to 25 per cent.
The rapid growth since the late 1980s in non-oil exports, particularly manufactured exports, was the result of a strong response of investment to trade sector reforms. The value of non-oil exports increased by an average of 21 per cent annually between 1985 and 1993. Besides the strong expansion of traditional exports (textiles, garments and plywood), there has been diversification into new exports, such as footwear, furniture and electrical machinery.s5 The ongoing reform of rules governing FDI has been an integral part of Indonesia's policies for promoting exports.S6 In addition, the devaluation in 1986 and continued real depreciation reduced the cost of production in Indonesia for foreign investors. At the same time, there was a transformation of manufacturing competitiveness in Asia (including Japan) in the late 1980s due to the sharp decline in the dollar-yen exchange rate and rising wage costs in the Asian newly industrialized economies (NIE). As the high-cost economies of Japan and the NIEs sought to relocate their more labour-intensive manufacturing industries to lower-cost countries in the region, policy changes in Indonesia made it an attractive destination, along with Thailand and Malaysia. The primary sources and sectors of FDI have changed over time: whereas Japan was by far the largest foreign investor prior to 1988, the Asian NIEs have since emerged as the major investors. Furthermore, investment from the NIEs has been concentrated in labour-intensive export industries.s7 Foreign direct investment has been an important force in product diversification of exports.

Infrastructure investment has been a priority in Government investment since the 1970s, when the rapid build-up of infrastructure capacity was concentrated in power generation, telephone lines, paved roads and irrigation.ss That investment has facilitated the surge in private investment since the late 1980s.s9 In particular, power development has been critical to the growth of manufacturing. From the mid-1980s to 1994, investment in physical infrastructure continued to be substantial, constituting approximately 4 per cent of GDP. Public investment has remained dominant in infrastructure investment.
Although there has been some privatization of public infrastructure enterprises since the implementation of a privatization programme at the beginning of the 1990s, the scale remains relatively small.
Demand for infrastructure has continued to rise, due to the sizeable backlog of unmet demand linked to rapid economic growth since the late 1980s and the new demand from anticipated future economic growth. However, given the reL
atively modest domestic savings rate (26 per cent of GDP) and the level of external debt, there is a constraint on how much of that demand can be met before serious imbalances occur. Thus, the physical infrastructure sector could remain a bottleneck to continued high economic growth and improvement in efficiency.
To date, Indonesia's macroeconomic policies and reform programmes have successfully revitalized private investment and contributed to economic diversification and growth. Their effectiveness appears to have been the result of their appropriateness and complementarity, reinforced by the credibility of the Government in an environment of political stability. They have, therefore, been able to generate the necessary economic adjustment in response to severely adverse turns in the international economic environment, as well as to restructure the economic system to take advantage of favorable international economic developments. Nevertheless, continued economic reform remains central to improvement in economic efficiency, which is critical to maintaining a sustainable high rate of economic growth.

Since the inception of economic reforms in 1978, China has achieved great success in its economic growth. GDP has grown at an average annual rate of approximately 10 per cent for 15 years. 90 While the market-oriented reform policies that were gradually adopted have created the necessary favourable conditions for the dynamism of the economy, the high investment ratio has been considered as the leading factor in most of the high growth. 91 However, large fluctuations in the growth rate of fixed investment have also been seen as the main cause of the "stop-and-go" macroeconomic cycles that the Chinese economy has experienced in the post-reform period. In addition, the majority of fixed investment has been in the less efficient State-owned enterprise (SOE)
sector, so that statistics showing the high rate of fixed investment have embodied signs of continuing policy concerns as well as successes. The Government, as a result, continues to try to balance policies in order to achieve the multiple objectives of a desirable pace of economic reform, a sustained high growth rate and macroeconomic stability.

The ratio of real fixed investment to real GDP has been rising steadily since almost the beginning of the economic reform process, from 20 per cent in 1981 to above 35 per cent in 1994 (see figure VII.6). Major factors responsible for the acceleration of investment in the last 15 years include reforms that have promoted decentralization in both the investment system itself and in the overall economic system; the high domestic saving rate; and increasing foreign capital inflows.
Reforms in the investment system have made significant changes in the investment decision process, investment financing and capital goods distribution.
Prior to those reforms, decision-making regarding fixed investment was strictly controlled by the central planning agencies and implemented by the Ministry of Finance, with investment financed mostly through budgetary grants to SOEs. Capital goods were supplied directly through the central material allocation system. Through reforms, investment decision-making has been gradually decentralized to local governments and enterprises. Although the final decision has remained with the central Government on investment projects that exceed a certain threshold level - anywhere from 30 million to 50 million yuan renminbi (Y), depending on the sector - the autonomy of local governments and enterprises in making investment decisions has increased significantly.
Meanwhile, the financing of investment has been changed substantially, along with reforms in the financial sector and in the SOE sector. Financing through grants from the central budget has been gradually replaced by interest bearing lending from State banks under the credit plan. More importantly, "self-raised" funds raised by local governments and enterprises have become the dominant source of investment financing, in the form of extrabudgetary resources, including retained earnings; capital depreciation funds; workers'
contributions; funds earmarked93 for investment in particular sectors, such as electricity generation and railroad construction; informal borrowing from the local population; and money raised through the rapidly emerging capital market.
By 1994, self-raised funds accounted for 51 per cent of total investment financing for SOEs (see table VII.5). The increasing importance of self-raised funds in financing fixed investment undoubtedly reflects the decentralization of investment decisions in China; the earmarked fund component in self-raised funds, however (about 10 per cent of total investment in 1993 by the World Bank's estimate), is still largely influenced by the central Government.
The centralized channel for allocating capital goods has been gradually replaced by the market, increasing direct access to those goods by enterprises.
For instance, the number of categories of capital goods under State pricing control was reduced from 700 in the pre-reform period to about 30 in 1994, and the number of capital goods under direct State allocation was reduced from 250 to about 10 over the same period.
With those reforms in the investment system, combined with an expansion of the non-State sector (see below), the demand for fixed investment in the post-reform period has become increasingly less determined by central planning and increasingly more determined by local governments, enterprises and individuals. However, the decentralization of investment decisions has not been complemented by increased financial accountability of SOEs, and thus has not created incentives for local governments and State enterprises to take sufficiently into account investment risks and the cost of capital in their decision making. As a result, the demand for investment in the SOE sector is constrained only by the availability of funds.
On the supply side, the increasing investment rate has been accommodated by the high rate of domestic savings. The gross domestic saving ratio was estimated to be about 35 per cent of GDP in the post-reform period, with a slight upward trend. As household income rose, domestic savings shifted from the Government to households in the same period. Moreover, a rapidly developing financial sector that is more active than the old mono-bank system helped to mobilize household savings more effectively. It is also significant that with the share of household savings increasing dramatically and the share of Government savings declining, the supply of financing has also become greatly decentralized.
Accompanying the acceleration in domestic investment has been the increase in foreign investment in China. Attracted by China's high rate of economic growth and its potentially vast market, and encouraged by the preferential treatment accorded by China's open-door policies, foreign capital inflows have surged in recent years. In 1994, the total foreign capital inflow reached $43 billion, of which 80 per cent was direct foreign investment. The development experience of the coastal provinces, where most foreign capital has been concentrated, suggests that domestic investment and foreign investment have complemented each other. Indeed, some domestic investment has been directly tied to foreign investment in the form of joint-venture projects. As a source of investment financing, foreign investment accounted for roughly 15 per cent of total investment in 1994.
The fact that the rapid economic growth in the post-reform era has been largely accompanied by an increasing investment ratio and that the investment ratio has reached such a high level have naturally led analysts to question the sustainability of such performance in the future. Limited by the infeasibility of further increases in the investment ratio, future growth will have to rely more on improvement in the quality or efficiency of investment. However, because of the low level of efficiency of investment in the SOE sector and the low likelihood of radical reform of the sector in the near term, efficiency improvement in the rapidly growing non-State sector becomes the main focus of analysis.

Since the onset of economic reforms, the non-State sector94 has been growing rapidly in China. The share of the non-State sector in total industrial output reached 66 per cent by 1994, compared to 24 per cent in 1980. During the period 1984-1994, the growth rate of China's total industrial output averaged 18 per cent per annum, while that of SOEs averaged only 8 per cent per annum.
Policy reforms have greatly facilitated the development of the non-State sector.
The gradual decentralization of enterprise decision-making regarding production, distribution and pricing of a growing group of products has allowed non-State firms to supply and obtain capital goods and materials outside the State plan. Financial reforms have also created a commercial banking system and other non-bank financial institutions that have provided the non-State sector with greater access to financial resources. Rural reforms have released a large number of peasants from farming, thus generating readily available labour for employment in non-State enterprises. Rising rural income has not only created a demand for products of non-State enterprises but has also provided a pool of savings that can be tapped into via rural credit cooperatives or informal arrangements.
Furthermore, fiscal decentralization has created financial incentives for local governments to foster the development of urban collectives as well as township and village enterprises, which form the base of an important part of their revenues. The change in development strategy that has accompanied economic reforms, relying less on the direct role of the central Government, has also created a favourable environment for the growth of the non-State sector.
Although national data on the sectoral break-down of investment by nonState entities are not available, it can be deduced that most of that investment goes into labour-intensive manufacturing and services. In 1994, in the five coastal provinces of Jiangsu, Zhejiang, Fujian, Shandong and Guangdong, where the share of the non-State sector in total provincial industrial output was significantly greater than the national average (approximately 80 per cent versus 66 per cent), the share of investment by non-State firms in total investment is also much higher than the national average (65 per cent, 68 per cent, 54 per cent, 52 per cent and 59 per cent, respectively, versus 43 per cent). Those same provinces have experienced a phenomenal growth of township and village industries, which engage in labour-intensive manufacturing or assembly of goods, such as garments, electrical and electronic goods.
The dynamism of the non-State sector is also reflected in its efficiency relative to the State sector. Some measures of productivity can be used to gauge the relative efficiency of the non-State sector. Several studies have estimated the growth of total factor· productivity (TFP) in China's industrial sector, and have concluded that non-State firms performed significantly better than their counterparts in the State sector. Using both aggregate industrial data (1980-1988)
and regional survey data (1980-1989 and 1980-1992), the studies found TFP
growth in non-State industries to be at least 50 per cent higher than in SOES.
Relative profitability measures can also be used to compare the performance of the State and non-State sectors for the effectiveness of their investment.
According to estimates published by the State Statistical Bureau, in 1994, State-owned enterprises earned Y12.45 of pre-tax profit for every YI00 of fixed assets, while the comparable figure for village and township enterprises was Y20.45.!16 Although definitions and methods of estimation can be debated, those figures suggest that there may be a significant gap between the efficiency achieved by SOEs and that of their non-State counterparts.
The rise of the non-State sector has influenced the volatility as well as the level of aggregate investment. The share of investment by non-State entities in total investment increased (albeit intermittently) from 30.5 per cent in 1981 to 43 per cent by 1994, but with intervening fluctuations. As illustrated in figure VII.7, from 1982 to 1994 the growth rates of investment by the non-State sector were greater than those of the State sector, except in 1985 and during the period 1989-1992, which were periods of macroeconomic tightening in economic cycles that became observable in post-reform China. The cycle in the first half of the 1980s was rather mild (especially compared to the one in the second half of the 1980s), and its effect on the share of non-State investment in total investment was small and short-lived. In response to the overheating of the economy in 1988, however, the Government applied severe restrictions on credit and investment projects to slow down the economy and curb the high rate of inflation. Total investment was scaled back in 1989, and although the central Government relaxed its strict control over investment in subsequent years while maintaining an overall tight macroeconomic policy stance, nonState investment did not recover as quickly as the State sector. In other words, the growth of investment by the non-State sector was disproportionately affected when the Government pursued stabilization measures.
In addition, political developments in 1989 led to some uncertainty regarding the continuity of reform policies that supported the development of the non-State sector, which may have been a factor in the slow recovery of nonState investment in 1990. An examination of the sources of investment finance and the means of macroeconomic control during this period, however, point to more tangible variables that explain why investment in a more dynamic and more profitable segment of the economy was cut back more severely during the macroeconomic retrenchment of 1989-1990.
Investment decisions in non-State-owned enterprises are generally more responsive to changes in profitability, since they are accountable for their financial results. Thus, higher interest rates and credit tightening raise the opportunity cost of funds and deter investment. Moreover, non-State-owned firms are covered by administrative restrictions that the Government still relies on to curb total investment in periods of inflation-fighting, such as tighter control over and stricter enforcement of credit ceilings, and even administrative orders to ban certain investment projects (see below). Non-State firms are more likely to fall victim to such measures, because State banks will inevitably give priority to State-owned enterprises, even if they are relatively less efficient, because such banks are themselves not under full financial accountability. As a result, investment by non-State firms was supplanted by investment in the State sector during macroeconomic stabilization. Because of that bias in credit allocation, the recovery in non-State investment in the years immediately following the period of stabilization was slower than that in the less efficient State sector.
The cyclical pattern of investment growth in the non-State sector is very similar to that in the State sector, the pattern of relative growth rates, which reveals the disproportionate cutbacks in the non-State sector during periods of macroeconomic stabilization, further highlights the inefficiency in the allocation of investment in China in the 1980s. As illustrated in figure VII. 7, however, that pattern seems to have changed in the latest round of macroeconomic stabilization, in which the Government has refrained from excessive administrative measures and has employed indirect macroeconomic controls instead in order to engineer an economic "soft landing".
An economic system in transition and the concern about investment efficiency.
One increasingly prominent concern in China is whether its high levels of investment are adequately efficient. The overall efficiency of investment can be judged by the resource cost of investment. Using the stock of incomplete investment projects as an indicator of delays between investment and capital formation, and its ratio to total GDP as an indicator of the resource costs of investment, the World Bank found systemic inefficiency of investment in China and a lack of improvement in the post-reform years.
In addition, with increased competition from the non-State sector, the profitability of many SOEs has been deteriorating. For example, more than one third of the SOEs incurred losses in 1994, compared with 10 per cent in 1985 (when structural reforms started in the non-agricultural sector). Moreover, although the share of the State sector in total industrial output declined from about 75 per cent in the early 1980s to 34 per cent in 1994, its share in total investment in the industrial sector decreased much less over the same period, from 85 to about 75 per cent. Those facts suggest a significant discrepancy between the efficiency of investment in the State and non-State industrial sectors, even after taking into consideration that SOEs tend to be large enterprises in capital-intensive sectors.
Nevertheless, the Government intends to preserve the State enterprise sector.
One indication is that owing to Government concerns about the consequences of mass unemployment and related social stability issues, the Bankruptcy Law that was enacted in 1986 has never been applied to large SOEs and privatization of SOEs has been kept off the reform agenda, so that efficiency is not the highest priority. As a result, investment in the State sector still goes to loss-making firms. The overall quality of investment at the national level is thus dragged down by the continued investment in an increasing number of inefficient firms in the State sector.
That is not to say that reforms of the SOEs have not been attempted, but reform programmes mounted in the 1980s to create market-like incentives for SOEs to operate more efficiently did not fundamentally improve their overall economic performance. Moreover, while reforms in the formal investment system have contributed to the strong increase in investment demand in the postreform period, there have also been weaknesses. In particular, the decentralization of investment decision-making has not been accompanied by increased financial accountability. The replacement of most budgetary financing of investment by planned bank-loan financing did not automatically enhance the link between investment and the cost of capital either, because of the incomplete nature of reforms in the financial system as well as in the State enterprise sector. Today, reform plans for the SOEs focus on the separation of the role of the State as owner from its role as manager of the enterprises by converting SOEs into share-holding corporations; so far, however, no fundamental change has been made in enterprise governance that would increase the financial accountability of SOEs.
The financial sector is itself a special case of State-owned enterprises.
Although there have been significant reforms in the banking system, they have yet to create competition or the commercialization of State banks. The pre-reform mono-bank system has been transformed into a system currently consisting of one central bank, four specialized State banks, about 10 commercial banks, thousands of credit cooperatives and hundreds of non-banking financial institutions.
Until recently, the whole financial sector was subject to credit plans and credit ceilings determined by the central Government based on its investment priorities. Some indirect policy instruments, such as a discount rate, reserve requirements and money-market operations, have been newly created. However, all interest rates on deposits and loans have been set by central authorities that establish a narrow band within which banks can adjust their rates. As a result, the granting of investment loans and interest charges are not determined by the banks solely based on a profitability assessment of investment projects.
As has been learned in the case of the transition economies discussed in chapter VI above, unless enterprises bear the consequences of their investment decisions, the demand for investment will not be responsive to market conditions. Thus, enterprise reform that will improve enterprise governance and change the incentive structure is necessary in order to alter demand for investment at the enterprise level. And unless banks have the autonomy to make loans based on their evaluation of the profitability of projects, fund allocations for investment will remain inefficient. Therefore, reforms of the banking sector that will guarantee such independence and accountability of commercial banks are an integral part of an effort to improve investment efficiency.
Recognizing the importance of improving the quality of investment in sustaining long-term economic growth, the Government of China announced a new reform programme for the investment system in 1994, under which all investment projects are to be divided into three categories: projects with social benefits or of a non-profit nature, such as education, sciences, culture etc.; large infrastructure projects; and commercial (competitive) projects. Investment in the first category will continue to be financed by the budget. Investment in the second category will still be controlled by the Government but will be financed by newly established State policy banks. Investment in the last category, which will make up a large share of total investment, will be financed mainly by commercial banks, non-bank financial institutions and the capital market. Investment without funding from the State, including official borrowing abroad, will only need to be registered with the State Planning Commission; no approval by the Commission is required. Banks and enterprises will bear the full risk of investment projects.

The case studies presented above have analysed the most salient issues in the long-term growth of investment gleaned from the experiences of developing countries since the 1980s. Investment has been inextricably linked to the process of structural adjustment and economic reform. It was thought valuable, therefore, to examine the actual experience of individual countries so as to enhance understanding of the forces that shaped investment in that period. A
number of patterns have emerged, and are described below.

Investment decisions reflect a positive. assessment by a rational economic agent of the future state of the economy. An adverse economic environment that is expected to generate negative results in investments will deter investors. The economic environment deteriorated in much of the developing world in the early 1980s. Durable terms-of-trade shocks, the reversal of financial flows, the emergence of the debt crisis in many developing economies, and the recession in the developed market economies resulted in an unfavorable economic climate for some time. The need to quickly regain equilibrium in their external accounts led some countries to adopt drastic measures in order to reduce domestic absorption. The exchange rate was depreciated and imports were severely compressed, adversely affecting industries that were dependent on imported inputs, and output fell in several countries despite the incentives to exports created by the currency devaluation. Excess capacity developed, which discouraged or at least postponed investment. The public sector had to adjust as well, and cuts in public investment rather than in current expenditure were the usual initial instruments of fiscal adjustment. Public investment was reduced in several of the countries discussed above, such as Bolivia and Cote d'Ivoire, thus lowering the overall level of investment in the economy.
With few exceptions, the economic conditions in the early 1980s were not favourable for investment.
While the external balances' of many developing economies had improved by the mid-1980s, adjustment was incomplete in terms of domestic balances and problems of inflation (hyper-inflation in the case of Bolivia), and low growth persisted.
The servicing of the external debt had become too burdensome, and several countries started to ibuild up arrears on their debt payments. Moreovl3r, an additional terms-of-trade shock was inflicted on the developing economies (Bolivia in 1985; Cote d'Ivoire, Indonesia and Tunisia in 1986), revealing that the economic vulnerabilities of the early 1980s had not been adequately addressed and that most of those economies were suffering not from a liquidity problem but from more deeply rooted structural problems. The need for a more comprehensive policy change emerged in the mid-1980s in many developing countries, and it marked the beginning of a period of deepening policy reforms.
The general thrust of the reforms .launched in the second half of the last decade was the creation of a stable and predictable macroeconomic environment, further opening up the economy to market forces, including a deepening of trade liberalization and the creation of opportunities for the private sector so that it could become the engine of growth. The measures that were adopted varied from country to country, as the case studies have demonstrated. But in general, they pointed to a decline in government participation in the economy through deregulation, the abolition of public monopolies and privatization. The State therefore adopted a more indirect role that was supportive of private initiative through sound policies and the creation of new effective institutions.

Besides the complex task of formulating an appropriate policy package that is conducive to sustained growth, policy makers need to send clear signals to economic agents that the measures adopted can be expected to be sustained. 100 Anticipated policy changes contribute to the "wait-and-see" attitude that private investors have shown in many of the case studies presented here.
Since fixed capital is not easily mobile or tradable, and since the decision to invest entails risks that the expected outcome may not be realized, the investor may postpone investment that is perceived to be profitable if it is known that new information that might lead to a revision of expected profitability will be available at some time in the future. 101 In Cote d'Ivoire, for example, when the Government retreated on politically unpopular adjustment measures it detracted from the potential positive effect on investment of the progress in macroeconomic stability. In contrast, when Governments have demonstrated their commitment to avoiding macroeconomic instability, as in Indonesia and China, it has enhanced their effectiveness. At the same time, it is important to maintain a high degree of flexibility and adaptability in policy-making when policies are clearly unsustainable. Adherence to policies that result in increasing imbalance, such as the commitment to the fixed parity of the CFA franc to the French franc through 1993, have undermined policy credibility.
Changes in Government can also create considerable uncertainty about the future direction of the economy. Certainly, protracted political conflict and instability can have a disruptive effect on an economy as well as adverse effects on expectations of profitability for investment. However, consensus on the soundness and/or general orientation of current policies preserves continuity and reduces uncertainty. Chile is a good case in point: its return to democracy was peaceful and was achieved through a consensus-building process.
The new Government remained committed to existing economic policies, while giving higher priority to social sectors, which itself was a result of a new consensus among the Chilean people. Investment boomed in Chile after 1990.

A stable macroeconomic environment, with a low and predictable inflation rate, a competitive exchange rate and a well managed public deficit 102 is crucial for attracting investment. Since investment is about results that will materialize in the future, if uncertainties surrounding the major determining economic variables are reduced and the behavior of those variables can be anticipated with some degree of confidence, then the decision of economic agents to invest is facilitated. Econometric analyses have consistently shown the positive and statistically significant effect of macroeconomic stability on investment.
More recently, there have been some changes in the perception that stabilization will automatically lead to increased private investment and growth. It has been argued that in many countries, macroeconomic adjustment has not improved the response of private investment and that even in countries that have made substantial progress in correcting imbalances and restoring profitability - often through drastic cuts in re~l wages - the effect on private investment has been weak and slow to appear. 103 That observation affirms that investment decisions are actually influenced by an array of factors, macroeconomic stability being one of them. In fact, the revitalization of private investment after successful stabilization is still dependent, among other things, on the improvement of investment profitability and access to investment opportunities and financing, as discussed below.

Several developing countries entered the last decade with external debt levels that were well beyond the capacity of their economies to service, particularly in a context of very limited foreign financial inflows. External debt represents repayment obligations that were incurred when funds were borrowed.
Economic agents must assume that the obligations will be met and that resources to do so will be mobilized. Thus, debt acts as a tax over the domestic economy, reducing the expected returns an investment may bring. In other words, with most of the debt owed by the public sector or guaranteed by it, high levels of external indebtedness entail risks of increased taxation, devaluation and overall policy instability, which do not provide the right incentives for increased investment. Such risks affect not only domestic investors but also foreign investors and private creditors as well, all of whom assume that economies that are facing severe debt problems lack creditworthiness, and thus opt not to extend credit and resources. A vicious circle settles in: growth is reduced, investment is further compromised, the servicing capacity of the economy subsequently deteriorates, and arrears in some cases accumulate, leading to the validation of the initial negative expectations. Some of the economies analysed above have suffered from that problem, which is known in the literature as the "debt overhang" problem (Cote d'Ivoire and Bolivia).
That line of reasoning led to a change in the international debt management strategy in the late 1980s, when a series of debt reduction approaches were launched to covering both commercial debt (the Brady plan) and official bilateral debt (the Toronto and Houston and, more recently, the Naples terms in the Paris Club).104 The conclusion of debt rescheduling agreements under the Brady Plan initiative provided a boost of confidence for the economies concerned.
Other countries, while choosing not to follow the Brady route, have embarked on a strategy of debt reduction by a series of buy-backs and debt conversions that have reduced their debt burdens and helped to channel flight capital and other external resources to their economies in a rather successful way; Chile is a good example of that approach.

There is no accepted standard for the pace, scope and sequencing of reform that would result in investment growth, as can be seen in the different experiences of some countries with high levels of investment, such as Chile, China, Indonesia and Tunisia.los What appears to be important is the complementarily and consistency of stabilization policies, on the one hand, and of liberalization and reform measures, on the other hand.
For example, when assessing the effect of the devaluation of the real exchange rate on investment and growth, the potential for higher returns for the tradeable goods sector as a result of the resulting change in relative prices may stimulate investment, so that the devaluation ofthe CFA franc in January 1994 proved to be a boost for investment in Cote d'Ivoire, as analysed above, because of increased domestic prices in the exportable sector and some stimulus to import-competing industries. But by the same token, devaluation raises the cost of imported capital and other inputs, and also increases the local cur rency costs of firms with external debt, reducing their cash flow while the replacement cost of imported capital goes up. 100 Hence, the net effect of devaluation on investment is unclear.
Nevertheless, when combined with a concurrent reduction of tariffs and non-tariff barriers to offset the increase in the price of imported capital goods and inputs, devaluation seems to produce a positive effect on investment, as in the cases of Indonesia and Tunisia. In countries in which reforms are only partially implemented and import restrictions are still extensive, tariff exemptions and reductions granted to selected sectors have been effective in reducing the cost of imported inputs, as in China and Indonesia.
The effect of access to financing and the level of interest rates on investment is another example of the need for complementarily of policies. With the adoption of stabilization policies, interest rates have remained high because of policies for curbing inflation - particularly in the stabilization programmes anchored to the exchange rate - or to increase financial savings. 107 High real interest rates are often a deterrent to investment since they raise the cost of borrowing, thus reducing expected returns. Where investment is financed by the firm's own resources, a high interest rate increases the opportunity cost of retained earnings and makes financial investments more attractive than fixed investment.
In addition, the persistence of high interest rates, by rendering borrowers insolvent, aggravated the financial weakness of the banking sector of several developing countries and greatly reduced the availability of bank financing.
Until quite recently, the financial sectors in most developing countries were highly centralized and regulated, and were geared towards funding public investment and other priority sectors such as agriculture, with limited financing for private investors. Furthermore, government-imposed interest-rate ceilings within a context of accelerating inflation produced negative real interest rates and an outflow of funds from the banking system. Private investment, under such conditions, was constrained not by the high cost of finance but by the unavailability of credit. In China, the formal financial sector has been regulated to provide credit primarily for the high level of investment of the large State enterprise sector at the expense of the newly developing non-State sector.
With the easing of monetary and fiscal austerity, banking deregulation and the development of non-bank financial institutioris and capital markets, there has been increased financing for private investors, which has had a significant positive effect on private investment in many countries. Real lending rates after financial deregulation and reform have declined in some but not all countries (they have not, for example, in Tunisia and Bolivia). loa Where real interest rates have fallen, the effect on investment has been positive (Chile and Indonesia).
As the development of the financial sector is still in the early stages in most developing countries, there are many remaining distortions, such as barriers to the access of small firms and preferential access and terms for conglomerates or public enterprises (Indonesia and China), which have reduced the efficiency of the allocation of financial resources and of investment.
Public divestiture and stabilization have also been interrelated, but the reduction of public investment has not always led to an increase in private investment. Under pressure to reduce public deficits to contain inflationary pressures, public investment was reduced in many countries. It was argued that cuts in public investment were not completely detrimental for the economy since there had been enough evidence of ineffective public projects that failed to yield expected results. Moreover, since public deficits resulting from excessive public investment had also crowded out private investors, the control of public investment could have a positive effect on private investment. However, public investment can be important in supporting private investment. Synergies between public and private investment have been found: public investment in infrastructure and human capital development increases the profitability of private investment.lo9 In fact, as the case of Bolivia illustrates, one of the reasons for the limited expansion of investment activities in the country is the lack of adequate public investment in infrastructure. Indonesia, on the other hand, is a case in which public infrastructure and social development investment was shielded from reduction during the 1986 stabilization programme, when public enterprise investment and other Government expenditures were reduced.
The deregulation of private investment and the demonopolization of industries have been important measures used to promote investment. While they reduce the administrative costs of private investment and increase the range of possibilities for investment, their effect on investment varies, depending on the capital and technology requirements of the sector. The opening of labour-intensive manufacturing sectors (in conjunction with other conducive factors) has led to quick responses of private investment (Indonesia and Tunisia). In China, as discussed above, because of the extremely small base of private producers, it was investment by the rural collective enterprises that soared as a result.
The demonopolization of capital and technology-intensive industries, such as infrastructure and mining, has required the participation of large domestic investors and, to a greater degree, of foreign investors. Chile, for example, has been successful in attracting foreign investment in the mining industries, which has proved to be a boost for private investment.
The privatization of existing public enterprises has been used in some developing countries, particularly in Latin America, to shift investment from the public to the private sector and to improve fiscal balances. In comparison, the pace of such privatization has been slow in Asia, and much of the growth in private investment has been in new productive capacity.
The promotion of FDI has been important in increasing the inflow of investment and related technology into a number of sectors in many developing countries.
In most of those countries, the significance of FDI has been not in its share of total investment but in its contribution to investment in specific sectors.
Many countries have adopted a more liberal foreign investment legislation, under which the foreign investor is given rights comparable to those enjoyed by the domestic investor: profit and capital repatriation have been guaranteed after certain minimum periods, and areas that were once closed to foreign private initiatives have been opened. Access to large domestic markets, such as in Indonesia and China, is also a major attraction. In addition, increased access through the host country to international markets, through regional trade agreements or access to developed economy import quotas (such as garment quotas for Bangladesh, see box II), as well as growing regional economic integration (China and Indonesia), have been shown to stimulate foreign investment.
Investment is particularly important for economies that are emerging from civil war, domestic chaos or other political turmoil. The public infrastructure, farms and factories are likely to have suffered from years of damage or neglect. At the very least, expenditure on national security will have crowded out public investment and even basic maintenance. In addition, private investment will have suffered from capital flight because of the natural tendency of local and foreign entrepreneurs to seek safe havens for their capital in times of high risk and uncertainty. The key question for policy makers is how to undertal{.e and encourage the necessary investment in an economic and political environment that is still delicate.
The present chapter examines four countries that are in the process of transformation from societies of conflict to societies of peace and democracy. In two of the countries - Cambodia and El Salvador - that transformation has come after more than a decade of civil war, with considerable loss of human life. The other two countries - Haiti and South Africa - are undergoing a transition to democracy after enduring years of political turmoil, along with the burden of international sanctions. The authors believe that the experience of those four countries embodies lessons for other countries that are currently facing - or will face in the future - the welcome but difficult transition from civil strife to civil peace.

With the overthrow of the Government in 1970, Cambodia entered a state of civil war. Its economy and people. suffered greatly.l More than 20 years later, Cambodia was still devastated, with a destabilized society. Government expenditure was highly concentrated on military activities as a result of continuing conflict. But Cambodia had also developed a legacy of dependency on foreign donors for balance-of-payments support and government budgetary aid.
Economic policy had changed radically under the rule of the Khmer Rouge (1975-1978). Money was abolished and all forms of financial institutions and transactions were banned. The country also lost a large portion of its literate population, both on the "killing fields" and through emigration.
Under the subsequent Government, money was reintroduced in 1980 and a mono-bank system (typical of centrally planned economies) was established at the same time.2 By 1982, Cambodia had formally adopted an economic model of socialist planning. Due to continuing civil war, however, it never functioned well as a centrally planned economy. The Government initiated limited market reforms in 1985, when it encouraged private-sector activities in light industry and agriculture. Farmers were allowed to sell a portion of their output at market prices above the State procurement price. The private sector was permitted to export in 1987.
Starting in 1989, the scope of reform was broadened, prompted partly by the collapse of socialist ideology and partly by crises, in the balance of payments and fiscal balance brought on by the termination of financial support from the former USSR. Faced with large fiscal deficits, the Government increasingly used new money creation to cover expenses, and inflation had climbed to more than 150 per cent by the end of 1990. The official exchange rate of the riel (CR) was devalued by 150 per cent in that year against the dollar.
During this period, State enterprises were given more autonomy and private property rights were restored to allow private production in non-plantation agriculture. A two-tier banking structure consisting of the central bank and commercial banks was introduced in 1989. Joint ventures between the State and private sectors were legalized, and a foreign investment law was passed in 1989, allowing joint ventures and entirely foreign-owned operations. A privatization programme was introduced in 1991.
Thus, when the peace agreement sponsored by the United Nations was signed in Paris in October 1991, Cambodia was already moving away from central planning. But reconstruction of the country did not begin until peace was established; in that sense, the transition from conflict to peace coincided with the transition from a centrally planned economy to a market-based one.
The international community became deeply involved in the economy of Cambodia. Because of international concern that one of the four Cambodian political parties might employ control over international aid to its own advantage in the elections that were to take place in 1993, the United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC) was given responsibility for the financial operations of the Government in March 1992. UNTAC also coordinated the international aid effort and set in place the basic structure of macroeconomic operations. The World Bank and the International Monetary Fund introduced economic adjustment programmes to stabilize the economy and speed up the country's economic transformation.
The prospect for peace brought financial support from the international community to Cambodia. Aid from Western donors had reached $90 million in 1991, before the arrival of the United Nations in 1992. Estimated local spending of the United Nations Cambodia mission amounted to $200 million, about 10 per cent of Cambodia's GDP in 1992. The sudden injection of demand backed by foreign exchange added fuel to domestic inflation, while helping to slow the rise in the price of the dollar. As a result, inflation remained above 100 per cent in 1991 and 1992, while the price of the dollar increased at a slower pace, which entailed real appreciation of the riel (see table VIlLI), since the price of non-tradables increased sharply relative to the price of tradables.
Because of the overvalued riel and the direct demand of UNTAC, production of non-tradables boomed, especially in the construction and services sectors, while there was little growth in output of tradables, such as agriculture (see table VIIL2). Geographically, economic growth has been very much concentrated in the national capital and to a lesser degree in provincial urban centres, leaving vast rural areas backward and isolated.
The differential pattern of growth can be seen clearly in table VIII.2. Agriculture, which accounts for about half of GDP, derived most of its growth from forestry and livestock. Rice production, which is the staple food of the population and accounts for a large part of agricultural output, has been declining.
Security concerns and the presence of land-mines in the countryside are the two major obstacles to increased production of rice and other crops. The growth of forestry is largely a result of increased timber exports by the Government as part of its effort to increase non-tax revenues. In industry, construction accounts for most of the growth, fuelled by the influx of large numbers of international personnel and government expenditure on infrastructure. Transport, commerce and tourism dominate growth in the service sector.
Considerable progress was made in macroeconomic stabilization during 1993. The inflation rate was cut by two thirds in 1993 and halved again in 1994, while the exchange rate was devalued in real terms in 1993 and then stabilized (see table VIlLI). International aid replaced monetary emission as a method of financing the fiscal deficit. In addition, the elections removed some of the political uncertainty: the question of Khmer Rouge participation in the political process had threatened to unravel the newly established peace.
Since the departure of UNTAC in October 1993, there has been no reversal of economic reforms; in fact, the Government of Cambodia implemented additional fiscal and financial reform measures. Economic growth has been maintained and some confidence has been restored in the country, as reflected in increased investment (see table VIII).
Once peace was restored, Cambodia needed investment in practically every sector of the economy. Twenty years of war had severely damaged its physical infrastructure, and its human capital was depleted. The capacity of the Government to manage the macroeconomic environment and the institutions necessary for a market economy were both very weak.
In the circumstances, financing for investment had to come from abroad, and international support for Cambodia has been strong. At the Ministerial Conference on the Rehabilitation of Cambodia in Tokyo in June 1992, the September 1993 meeting of the International Committee on the Reconstruction of Cambodia (ICORC) in Paris and the March 1994 ICORC meeting in Tokyo, the international community pledged approximately $1.6 billion to rehabilitate Cambodia. Pledges by multilateral and bilateral donors for the period 19921995 totalled $2.3 billion, of which $1.3 billion had been disbursed over the same period.
Of the total international aid disbursed to Cambodia between 1992 and 1995, 19 per cent was for technical assistance; 6.5 per cent for investmentrelated technical assistance; 28 per cent for investment project assistance;
19 per cent for budgetary and balance of payments support; and 27 per cent for food and emergency relief. Aid disbursed for transport, communications, education and health accounted for 29.5 per cent of the total,3, while capital expenditure in total government outlay increased from 13.7 per cent in 1990 to 35.6 per cent by 1995.
Public investment, mostly in infrastructure rehabilitation financed by international aid, has increased steadily since 1992, enlarging its share of a growing GDP. Public investment also provided some of the necessary physical and institutional infrastructure for the recovery of private investment, which began to respond in 1994 (see table V).
There is anecdotal evidence that investment by private domestic sources (mostly in rehabilitating the capital, Phnom Penh, and housing construction)
and the flow of foreign direct investment (FDI) to the country began soon after the restoration of peace in October 1991. In any event, gross investment (public and private) increased from less than 10 per cent of GDP in 1992 to more than 14 per cent in 1993 and 19 per cent in 1994, with large increases in nongovernment investment in 1993 and 1994.
Aside from the broader efforts at political and macroeconomic stabilization, the Government took measures to create an environment conducive to private investment. In the financial sector, a central bank with autonomous powers over monetary policy and the regulation of the operations of all financial institutions was formally created by legislation in 1992. A commercial banking sector also emerged. The newly-created banking sector provided an institutional framework to channel savings into private investment in the country.
As adjustment measures worked to stabilize the foreign-exchange market and the gap between the official rate and the market-determined parallel rate narrowed to I per cent, exchange rates were unified to the market rate, which paved the way for the liberalization of the current account to encourage investors.
In order to further boost private investors' confidence in the country and to provide incentives for foreign investment, the Government of Cambodia passed a new foreign investment law in August 1994. By early 1995, approximately $2.2 billion in direct foreign investment had been approved by the Government, although the actual amount of foreign investment is not known. However, based on information on approved projects, FDI is concentrated in tourism and financial services, which account for two thirds of the total approved investment.
Manufacturing attracted about IS per cent of total investment, while agriculture received only 3 per cent.
So far, most FDI has come from countries or areas in the Asia and Pacific region: Malaysia, Singapore, Taiwan Province of China, and Thailand.
Investors from those neighbouring countries are more familiar with the political, cultural and legal background of Cambodia, and geographic proximity gives them the advantage of knowing the rules of the game, including the informal rules.
Domestic private investment and FDI have been concentrated in sectors with prospects of high immediate returns and in which the investment is reversible, reflecting investors' reactions to uncertainty in Cambodia;4 a floating hotel and later a floating casino outside Phnom Penh were extreme examples of that type of investment.
Personal security constitutes the most important source of uncertainty.
Residual Khmer Rouge forces fight on in parts of the country, and robberies committed by unemployed ex-combatants and underpaid government police forces also pose a security threat. In addition, there is some doubt among residents about the stability of a coalition Government that is perceived to be weak, giving rise to the fear that present policies might be reversed by a future Government.
Unresolved internal security problems have also had an indirect impact on investment through the Government's budget. Because of security concerns, the Government continues to spend large sums on the military and defense (one third of total expenditure in the revised budget for 1995, and 29 per cent in the proposed budget for 1996), which crowds out investment in such areas as the rehabilitation of infrastructure, education and health, which are crucial for the country's development.
The fragility of peace and the complexity of social and economic development in Cambodia indicate that the full transition from conflict to peace and growth will take some time. International aid will thus remain necessary, in particular, to assist in the integration of the country. It is already clear, however, that private-sector investors and resources - both domestic and foreign can be mobilized in Cambodia and can be expected to commit to longer-term projects as the situation in the country stabilizes further. Public funds and international support in a broad sense are thus an important complement to the domestic political and economic processes that will ultimately determine the pace of recovery and development in Cambodia.

Armed conflict in EI Salvador is said to date from the end of 1980, but the country had been on the verge of civil war since 1978.5 A wave of kidnappings and politically motivated murders had continued unabated, even after a military coup by junior officers established a civilian-military junta in October 1979, promising political and economic reforms. At the beginning of 1980, civilian members of the junta changed, and on 6 March 1980 the new junta imposed a state of siege and ordered army troops to expropriate all farms larger than 500 hectares (ha), turning most of them into worker-owned cooperatives.
The expropriated farms contained nearly 200,000 ha, more than 14 per cent of the country's arable land. In addition, the jurita threatened to expropriate the land offarms measuring 100 to 500 hectares in size, nationalized all financial institutions and established Government agencies for overseas sales of coffee and sugar.
Investment and output were the immediate casualties of those policies and of the armed conflict that erupted between the Government and the Frente Farabundo Marti para la Liberaci6n Nacional (FMLN), a leftist guerrilla movement formed in November 1980 out of the political-military organizations active in EI Salvador in the late 1970s. The ratio of gross private investment to GDP dropped from more than 13 per cent in 1978 and 1979 to 6.4 per cent in 1980. Between 1979 and 1982, real GDP fell by 21 per cent and real per capita GDP by 25 per cent.
Over the ensuing years, security expenditures crowded out spending on basic maintenance and expansion of telecommunications, electrical power, transport, water and waste services. The guerillas, in a war of attrition, struck repeatedly at the country's infrastructure, especially telephone exchange boxes and electrical' transmission towers. The authorities were usually able to repair the damage quickly but had to spend vast sums merely to maintain an infrastructure in operation, sums that in time of peace could have been deployed to modernize and expand infrastructure.
El Salvador received a large amount of foreign aid in the 1980s, but its external environment was otherwise unfavourable for a number of reasons: a decline in world coffee prices, higher international interest rates and a breakdown of trading arrangements within the Central American Common Market.
The government budget was in continual deficit and its financing by monetary emission of the central bank fuelled inflation. That put pressure on the fixed exchange rate, so a dual exchange rate was introduced: an overvalued official rate in effect at all financial institutions, with strict controls for collecting earnings from exports, and an unregulated, informal black-market rate. Inflation caused the black-market rate to diverge more and more from the official rate.
Although private investment and output grew modestly after 1982, they never recovered the levels of 1979 during the period of civil war. As a percentage of GDP, private investment in current prices increased steadily from its 1980 low of 6.4 per cent, reaching 9.8 per cent in 1989 and 12.3 per cent in 1991. Public investment was an even greater casualty of war, but instead of a sharp decline followed by a slow recovery, it decreased almost steadily from more than 6 per cent of GDP in the period 1975-1980 to less than 3 per cent by 1990, and remains depressed even today.
More than 75,000 people, mostly civilians, died in the civil war, and about 1 million people, an estimated 20 per cent of the population, left the country.
The United States of America was the destination of choice for most, but significant numbers also went to Costa Rica, Belize, Mexico, Canada· and other countries. More than 80 per cent migrated illegally, so that official statistics underestimate the number of emigrants. El Salvador lost many of the best and brightest of its workers: analysis of household survey data reveals 42 per cent of emigrants to have 10 years or more of schooling, compared to 13 per cent of the non-emigrant labour force.

El Salvador is the most densely populated country of the American continent, with only 0.25 ha of agricultural land per capita.7 Land distribution has historically been extremely uneven. At one time, 14 families reputedly owned almost all the fertile land, leaving hundreds of thousands of families landless;
access to land has thus long been a source of tension in the countryside.
Indeed, the Government chose to continue with land reform despite and to some extent because of the civil war. By 1989, 48,700 former tenants had received a title to the small plots they tilled, increasing to nearly 82,000 the number of families benefiting from agrarian reform and increasing to more than 290,000 ha (a fifth of all agricultural land) the amount of farm land affected.

Numerous estates had been expropriated in 1980 under the initial land reform programme, but for the most part they were sugar and cotton plantations since coffee farms rarely reach 500 ha in size. However, despite the official commitment to land reform, after 1980 the Government did not expropriate the land of the large estates, except for plots rented to landless tenants. The consti tution of 1983 increased the 100 ha limit for private holdings promised by the reformist junta to 245 ha, which would still have resulted in the expropriation of a large number of coffee plantations, but implementation of the measure was delayed until 1987, giving farmers ample time to transfer legally -and sometimes also in fact - land in excess of the limit to unrelated buyers and to members of their families.
It is hardly surprising that land also figured in the peace accords, albeit outside the context of a general agrarian reform. 9 In October 1992, as an implementing supplement to the negotiations under the peace accords, the Government and the FMLN agreed to a proposal of the Secretary-General of the United Nations on how to transfer approximately 12 per cent of EI Salvador's agricultural land to 7,500 former FMLN combatants, 15,000 former soldiers and 25,000 occupants of private land in zones that had been controlled by the FMLN. 19 The Government was to obtain the land by purchasing plots at market prices from willing sellers. Targeted beneficiaries were to receive plots of 1.4 to 5 ha in size, depending on the quality of the land, in addition to technical assistance and a mortgage equal to the market value of the property. The plots could be located anywhere in the country; landless farmers in zones formerly controlled by the FMLN sometimes received a title to the land that they farmed, but only if the legal owner was willing to sell.
The land transfer has proceeded much more slowly than planned, partly because of implementing delays and partly because of the high costs that are borne by beneficiaries. Land is purchased at market prices, and neither peasants nor ex-combatants are eager to assume the debt that buying such land entails. Although the 30-year mortgages carry a 6 per cent rate of interest and a 4-year grace period, which are very favourable terms compared to commercialloans, the existence of a large mortgage on land precludes its use as collateral for a loan for working capital. In addition, technical assistance and credit have been in short supply, and it is rareJor both to be provided at the same time.
With available technology, a farmer in EI Salvador cannot support a family growing basic grains on a small plot of land. It has been estimated that as of the early 1990s, 1.4 ha of good land yielded a net income of no more than $270 a year from maize, from which the farmer would also have had to meet his mortgage payments after the grace period, while three to five hectares of land of poorer quality had such a low yield that net income would not have been much higher. Melons, tomatoes and vegetables required considerably more investment than basic grains but might have yielded a net income of $2,700 a year or more for farmers on land of the same size and quality. Permanent crops, such as coffee, citrus fruits, nuts and avocados, promised an even larger net income, but again their production required investment of considerable sums of money and a wait of three to five years from the time of planting to the first harvest.
Moreover, the 12 per cent of land involved in the arms-for-Iand deal was subject to much the same difficulties as agriculture as a whole in EI Salvador.
Indeed, agricultural production suffered most from the violence of civil war and has been the slowest sector to recover (see table VIII.3). Agricultural prices in general have been depressed. Small farmers have lacked access to credit and the technical knowledge required to invest successfully in new crops. Large farmers have had access to credit or could invest their own savings, but expected returns would have had to overcome a number of uncertainties.
Evidently, land ownership has been a politically charged issue with important social and economic dimensions in EI Salvador. The general agrarian reform that had been set in motion in 1980 had already constituted the most radical non-socialist redistribution of land in Latin America except for Mexico.
Another discouragement of rural investment was that some former combatants who were landless and unemployed turned to banditry in the countryside, creating additional uncertainty.
When they do invest, farmers in EI Salvador prefer projects with a quick return over long-term ventures, even if the latter promise a higher rate of return. For basic grains, for example, there is a relatively short time from planting to harvest, and production is recovering despite the set-back of the drought of 1994. In contrast, coffee and cotton output is stagnating. Similarly, poultry production has increased, whereas beef production continues to fall (see table VIII.3). It is no coincidence that a chicken reaches market weight much sooner than a steer, and price movements within the agricultural sector do not account for such differential performance (see table VIII.4).
In the original peace accords, it was envisaged that the legalization of the affected land tenure would be completed in 1992; by the end of 1995, however, the process was still not concluded,'3 and the political goals of the land pro- gramme had thus not yet been reached. Meanwhile, agriculture in general remained relatively depressed. In other words, despite the political importance of land and agriculture, the economic dynamism and the investment in the post-conflict period has largely been elsewhere in the Salvadoran economy.

In 1989, while the war continued, a newly elected Government took office promising to reverse many of the existing economic policies (with the important exception of land reform). In 1990, the central bank thus lifted restrictions on sale of foreign currency, and floated the official exchange rate. It quickly depreciated to a level close to the black market rate, but has since been man aged through central bank purchases and sales of foreign exchange in order to maintain a relatively constant nominal exchange rate (between 8 and 9 colones per dollar). In addition, the Government closed its marketing agencies for coffee and sugar, removed price ceilings from basic grains for domestic consumption, and reduced tariffs on imports. Reprivatization of the banking system began in 1991 (it was completed in November 1995).
For a time, the war appeared to intensify, with open guerrilla battles reaching the capital city of San Salvador for the first time in the offensive of November 1989. However, prospects for a negotiated settlement also began to improve.
Due to those political and economic developments, investor confidence strengthened. The ratio of gross private investment to GDP increased from less than 10 percent in 1988 and 1989 to more than 11 per cent in 1990 and 12 per cent in 1991. After the signing of Peace Accords on 16 January 1992, private investment returned to its pre-conflict level (in excess of 13 per cent of GDP) and GDP growth increased to more than 6 per cent per annum. On 15 December 1992 the war officially ended, and the FMLN was certified as a political party. By 1994, private inve~tment had risen to almost 15 per cent of GDP.
Including government investment, the share was 18.5 per cent (see table VIII.5).
Private investment in EI Salvador does not appear to be constrained by liquidity.
On the contrary, according to one researcher, the country "suffers more from a lack of profitable investment opportunities than from a lack of financing for them. Formal sector institutions have an excess of loanable funds".14 Since investment has been relatively strong that assessment is clearly an exaggeration, but there are areas of concern regarding private investment, not to mention questions about the adequacy of public investment in infrastructure.
One such concern is the impact of remaining uncertainties. In addition to the effect on farmers noted above, uncertainty affects the rest of the economy as well, with the result that investment is greatest in sectors where exit from the industry (and the country) is relatively easy. Thus, export processing zones, which employed only 4,200 workers in 1989, employed 62,000 workers in 1996, primarily in the manufacture of garments. While that is a very positive development, such investments are easily reversible: those jobs could be lost as quickly as they were created.
An additional concern is whether price signals to investors have been distorted by the so-called "Dutch disease", which can misdirect investment expenditure (see box VIlLI). Dutch disease is the real exchange rate appreciation caused by an abundant supply of foreign exchange, which in the case of El Salvador is the joint result of large inflows of migrants' remittances ($1.1 billion in 1995), substantial capital repatriation and continuing foreign assistance.
Recorded remittances of emigrant workers increased sharply from less than 4 per cent of GDP in 1989 to nearly 8 per cent in 1990 and more than 11 per cent in 1992 (see table VIIL4).15 In the 1980s, not only was the inflow of remittances smaller but its contribution to the supply of foreign currency was offset to a large extent by the demand for foreign exchange for capital flight.
In the 1990s, however, remittance inflows - along with private and official capital - finance imports and are added to central bank reserves. With the demand for imports easily met from the abundant foreign-exchange inflows, imports were under little price pressure, while the prices of non-tradables rose more strongly. The result was the "Dutch disease" appreciation of the real exchange rate, even while the nominal exchange rate remained unchanged.
A great incentive was thus created for investment in non-tradables, including services, residential housing andeommercial buildings, rather than in agriculture and manufacturing. Indeed, construction is a leading sector in the economic recovery. The price of new construction, which has a large non-tradable component, has been increasing rapidly, as can be seen in table VIIL4.
The central bank attempted to reduce the operation of Dutch disease by "sterilizing" the effect of its purchases of foreign exchange on the domestic money supply. It sold central bank bonds to absorb money in circulation and raised the reserve requirements of commercial banks, which reduced liquidity, as intended, but merely postponed the inevitable increase in the price ofnontradables, because domestic interest rates rose and attracted an even greater inflow of foreign currency.
The lesson of that experience is that the way to counter a real appreciation of the exchange rate is to address it directly and shift spending towards tradable Strong foreign-exchange inflows are not an unmitigated blessing. On the one hand, they give a country access to imports, which can be used to expand investment or increase consumption.
On the other hand, they can depress production in export or import-competing activities, afactor called "Dutch disease".
Dutch disease occurs when foreign-exchange inflows exceed the outflow over a period and market forces then lower the domestic price of foreign exchange. If the exchange rate is not free to appreciate, an equivalent effect occurs indirectly (albeit with a lag) because the central bank buys up the excess foreign exchange at the set price and thereby puts more domestic money into the economy. With more money in the economy, domestic prices will rise, including wages and other costs of production. However, producers of tradables still have to compete with foreign goods whose prices have not risen, so they are less free to raise prices, which discourages their production. That kind of negative effect came to be called "Dutch disease"
after the Netherlands faced such difficulties in the 1970s as a result of substantially increased foreign-exchange earnings from exports of natural gas.
EI Salvador has experienced strong inflows of remittances, which have not only added to the nations's supply of foreign exchange but have also been of obvious benefit to the persons who received them. In EI Salvador, workers' remittances go largely to low-income families, where they boost consumption more than savings or investment. Segundo Montes analysed a survey of households and found that one third of the families surveyed received remittances from at least one relative who had emigrated to the United States of America, and that those remittances represented, on average, 47 per cent of the family's income"
If the remittances were spent entirely on additional imports, increased demand for foreign currency would offset the increased supply and there would be no pressure for the exchange rate to change: the inflow of foreign exchange would flow out almost immediately. In general, if all the remittances were spent on tradables (goods and services that can be exported or imported), there would be no Dutch disease.
But in fact it would be impossible for a family to spend additional income entirely on tradabies.
Suppose, for example, that a recipient of remittances purchases an imported television set. Only part of the purchase price represents a payment for imports; part is payment to the importer and merchant (wholesale and retail services, a non-tradable) and part is payment of import duties and sales taxes. Even if the Government spends all its increased tax revenue on imports, there will still be increased demand for wholesale and retail services, hence an increase in the relative price of non-tradables (real exchange-rate appreciation), giving rise to Dutch disease. That is an extreme example, however; there is ample reason to believe that a substantial share of remittances in EI Salvador are spent directly on non-tradables.
The most important difficulty for policy makers in the face of Dutch disease is in assessing the sustainability of the inflows. If they were only temporary, then the disincentives to production of tradables would inappropriately shift investment towards the non-tradables sector.
After the flows ended, the expansion of tradables production would be warranted but the capital stock would have been constructed with another emphasis, making the inevitable adjustment more difficult.
Even if the remittances were deemed a particular source of Dutch disease in EI Salvador, the solution is not to discourage the inflow of remittances; the country would be poorer without them. Moreover, unlike loans and direct foreign investments, they are unrequited transfers to the economy. Indeed, policy could well seek to sustain the flow of remittances over the medium to long term. But Dutch disease is the net result of all the flows taken together, and policy might look to stretch out other capital inflows in order to contain excessive upward pressure on the real exchange rate.
At the same time, policy makers need to be concerned about the possibility of an abrupt fall in the inflow of foreign exchange. Such afall would be more likely in capital flows, whose volatility is well known, or foreign aid, which can be unilaterally cut off, than in workers'
remittances. Even so, absent a continuing flow of new emigrants, remittance inflows would be expected to decline only slowly as migrants' links to their homeland became weaker.
goods. Reduction of maximum import tariffs from 290 per cent to 20 per cent has helped, and tariffs are programmed to fall to a maximum of 15 per cent by 1996 and 6 per cent by the end of the century. But beyond that, the economic reality is that the developments that cause pressure for a real exchange-rate appreciation will also set in motion economic forces that will bring about changes in relative prices that are in any case equivalent to a nominal appreciation.
Indeed, real exchange rate appreciation is precisely what is required for adjustment when the pressures for appreciation are lasting ones. The difficulty is in distinguishing that situation from a more temporary foreign-exchange bonanza, as occurs when there is a surge of capital repatriation mainly into relatively liquid and reversible investments. Screening capital inflows to keep out "hot money" and temper the exchange rate appreciation in such circumstances is a policy approach that has received increasing attention in recent years. 
The collapse of the long-powerful Duvalier regime in February 1986 left Haiti with an impoverished population, a bankrupt State and a faltering economy.
Between 1986 and 1991, five successive Governments were unable to reverse the situation. Indeed, the economic situation spiralled downward, with a further dramatic deterioration in economic and social conditions after the military coup in September 1991 that ousted the democratically elected Government of lean-Bertrand Aristide. The international embargoes 18 and the freezing of development aid that followed exacerbated the economic difficulties. 19 Real GDP declined an estimated 25 per cent between 1991 and 1994.
Activity in export-processing plants - accounting for more than three quarters of total export revenue prior to the coup - came to an almost complete halt.
Exports fell from close to $200 million in 1991 to about $60 million in 1994, and imports fell from over $400 million to about $170 million over the same period. 20 Output in the service sector decreased in line with the rest of the economy, while the tourist industry all but disappeared. 21 Central government revenue declined from about 8 per cent of GDP in 1991 to 3.4 per cent in 1994, while expenditures increased, mainly in the form of increases in the wage bill. With virtually no external resources available, the fiscal deficit was financed by credit from the central bank and by the accumulation of external arrears.
Inflation doubled from an average of 18 per cent per annum in 1991-1993 to 36 per cent in 1994 (see table VIII.6), peaking in August 1994 at a 50 per cent annual rate. Inflation was fuelled by the vast increase in the money supply and was led by the increased prices of tradable goods owing to the sharp depreciation of the gourde (G), which lost half of its value against the United States dollar following the imposition of the 1991 international trade embargo.
Against that background, investment fell dramatically from more than II
per cent of GDP in 1991 to less than 2 per cent in 1994 (see table VIII.6.);
both public and private investment fell, resulting in a serious deterioration of the country's infrastructure and industrial base.
With the return of Haiti's democratically elected president in October 1994, the Government launched a major adjustment and reform effort aimed to secure macroeconomic stability as a first step in recovery and sustained development.
That effort was supported by the financial and technical assistance of the international community in the context of the Emergency Economic Recovery Programme (EERP) that was agreed with the Government in January 1995. Specific measures implemented by the Government included the abrogation of quantitative restrictions on imports; the reduction of tariffs; the elimination of the requirement that exporters surrender 40 per cent of their export receipts; the suspension of subsidies; the suspension of ceilings on interest rates; and the extension of the sales tax to banking services. The privatization of several State enterprises, another component of EERP, was postponed in 1995.
Meanwhile, donors' assistance helped to eliminate $82 million of arrears to multilateral agencies, clearing the way for emergency lending by IDB, IMF and the World Bank. In May 1995, Haiti reached a rescheduling agreement with its Paris Club creditors on concessional terms, eliminating the remaining external payments arrears to bilateral creditors. In addition, multilateral agencies and bilateral donors committed $1.7 billion for the period 1995-2000 to finance the economic recovery programme, about one third of the funds were projected to be disbursed by the end of 1995. Most of the funds went to balance-ofpayments support; humanitarian assistance; and governance, including reform of the justice system, electoral support and modernization of public administration.
Virtually no funds have yet been disbursed in support of the private sector, such as industrial restructuring or assistance to small credit institutions, and only limited amounts have been directed towards infrastructure.
By the end of the 1994-1995 fiscal year (September 1995), the stabilization programme was showing results: inflation had declined to an annual rate of 28 per cent from 36 per cent the previous year; tax revenue had increased from $59 million to $150 million, equivalent to 8 per cent of GDP, a great improvement if low by regional standards; and foreign-exchange reserves had surged to $121 million, quadrupling from the previous year and covering two and a half months of imports. In addition, GDP in the second half of 1995 recorded growth for the first time in five years. The expansion had been fuelled by an increase in government expenditure from $121 million in fiscal 1994 to $279 million in fiscal 1995, funded largely by foreign assistance. In addition, spending by the United Nations mission and foreign aid missions boosted consumption and investment.
Nevertheless, financing of the fiscal deficit by the central bank, which had almost ceased in the first half of the 1994-1995 fiscal year, resumed later in the year due to an unexpected suspension in external financing. 24 However, the central bank was able to contain the new inflationary pressures and avoid excessive nominal devaluation of the gourde by "sterilizing" the deficit financing;
that is, it sold a large amount of its foreign-exchange reserves (about $22 million between September and December 1995) and absorbed the unplanned additions to the money supply.
But that action has left the central bank in a difficult situation. The fiscal deficit is quite large - more than 7 per cent of GDP - so that its further monetization is likely to renew inflationary pressures unless an inflow of international aid or private capital replenishes the foreign-exchange reserves of the central bank.

The Haitian financial system consists of a central bank; 11 commercial banks; two mortgage banks; a private development foundation; and a widerange of cooperatives, credit unions, farmers associations and non-governmental organizations. What the system does not do very well, however, is match small investors with appropriate investment funds, particularly in the agricultural sector.
The commercial banking system is relatively recent, dating from the 1970s;
two of them - Banque Nationale de Credit and Banque Populaire Haitienne - are government-owned but targeted for privatization, while three others are branches of international banks.
With few exceptions, Haitian banks are very risk-averse and tend to limit lending to a small group of well-known, highly collaterized clients, even though they now have a large amount of deposits. As shown in table VIII.7, in September 1995 total deposits of commercial and mortgage banks amounted to G 9.3 billion (approximately $620 million), or about 30.4 per cent of GDP, the highest ratio in six years. At the same time, total loans outstanding were G 4.1 billion ($273 million), or only 34.3 per cent of total bank assets, down from 52.6 per cent in 1990. Cash accounts represented a hefty 52.5 per cent of total assets in September 1995, albeit down from 57.2 per cent the previous year.
Only three banks have agencies outside Port-au-Prince, an urban bias reflecting a preference for commerce and manufacturing, with agriculture receiving only a marginal share of loans, or an average less than 2 per cent of total loans in the period 1989-1994. That phenomenon can partly be explained by insecure land tenure in the agricultural sector, an issue that the Government is now seeking to address (see below). But effective rural lending also requires an outreach capability that is costly given the small size of most landholdings, so that bankers prefer urban property and foreign-exchange deposits to guarantee loan repayment. Potential borrowers without such collateral have no access to bank credit.
The needs of rural small and medium-sized businesses are almost entirely provided by non-bank financial intermediaries. Many of them report demands that they cannot satisfy in the communities in which they operate. Some are nongovernmental organizations, and current legislation prevents them from mobilizing savings, so that the scope of their operations depends on donor assistance.
Haitian bankers cite the uncertain political and economic climate, the absence of a functioning legal system, and government intervention - in particular the high reserve requirements - as the primary reasons that they do not pursue new clients. Yet interest rate ceilings were eliminated in May 1995, and there is a large spread between the average interest rate paid on savings (demand) deposits and that charged on loans: in 1994-1995, the two rates fluctuated from 3.5 to 5.0 per cent and from 16 to 18 per cent, respectively. On the other hand, since the rate of inflation exceeded 20 per cent, the cost of credit and the return to savers were both negative in real terms.
For the last 15 years, Haiti's central bank has relied on high reserve requirements to contain the inflationary impact of the monetization of budget deficits. Reserve requirements of about 50 per cent impose a heavy tax on financial savings and continue to be a major constraint on bank intermediation.
Only the development of a market for government securities would allow the central bank to reduce significantly the reserve requirement, which is currently the main instrument for financing the fiscal deficit.
Large dollar inflows in 1995 were used partly for imports, but they were also partly spent locally and added to dollar accounts in Haitian banks, resulting in a near doubling of dollars held in the banks to about 20 per cent of total deposits. Those dollar accounts are not subject to reserve requirements, but only 50 per cent of such deposits have been lent to borrowers, mainly owing to a limited demand from qualified clients whose cash flow in dollars would adequately reduce the exchange-rate risk.

Despite the economic progress achieved in the first year of the new Government, private investment has been slow to respond. Aside from shortcomings in the financial system as a financial intennediary, as discussed above, there are three broad reasons for the slow response: continued political and macroeconomic instability, a lack of clear property rights in agriculture and poor infrastructure.
By and large, private investors have taken a "wait and see" attitude. In the first place, although perceptions of security improved following the arrival of the multinational force in September 1994, the process of disarmament and reintegration of the disbanded anny of 7,000 people and paramilitary forces was not quickly completed.. In addition, considerable uncertainty surrounded the legislative and presidential elections of June and December 1995, respectively.
However, the installation of a new President in February 1996, followed by a new Government and the announcement of their policy programmes, should give the signals that the business community is looking for and gradually restore business confidence.
In any event, the long decades of political and economic instability in Haiti have left domestic investors with a strong preference for projects that are reversible at a low cost. Commerce, for example, is preferred to manufacturing or agriculture because it is an activity that typically involves a smaller amount of fixed investment.
In the manufacturing sector, export processing attracted considerable investment in the past; like commerce, it is an activity that requires little machinery or equipment and is thus preferred in an uncertain environment.
Firms in the sector assemble a number of products, primarily clothing but also toys, electronics and sporting goods, taking advantage of Haiti's low labour costs25 and its proximity to the United States of America. A majority of firms are locally owned, although some are of United States origin. By the end of 1995, some 40 export-processing plants employed about 12,000 workers, down from 145 plants and 40,000 employees in 1991 but still on the rise, having closed down almost completely during the embargo period. The Government expects at most an additional 5,000 jobs in export processing by the end of 1996. Haitian authorities count on new arrivals and the reopening of local firms rather than the return of the companies that left the country for the Dominican Republic and Central America.
As in other post-conflict countries, investment in agriculture in Haiti has been restrained because it is almost completely irreversible and thus highly risky in an uncertain environment. An additional dimension in Haiti, however, is that few farmers have title to the land that they work. Haiti's agricultural sector is characterized by smallholdings - which account for almost 75 per cent of the cultivated land - and low productivity. The absence of clear property rights in agriculture has encouraged violent land conflicts and exploitation of land for quick gain, resulting in deforestation, soil erosion, flooding and desertification.
To tackle the issue of land tenure, the Institut National pour la Reforme Agraire was created in May 1995. The main objectives of the reform are to reduce the insecurity of land tenure, redistribute some State lands to peasant farmers, bring environmental protection concerns into land tenure reform, and consolidate and rationalize land holdings. Those are issues of high political sensitivity, however: limited progress has been achieved to date and little is expected in the near future.
Haiti's physical infrastructure was poor to begin with and has deteriorated significantly; its inadequacy is an important disincentive to investment. Several large public utilities are financially distressed and fail to provide adequate service.
Energy consumption in Haiti is the lowest in Latin America. The ineffectual state of electrical power production illustrates the nature of the situation.
During 1995, out of an installed public electricity capacity of approximately 180 megawatts (MW), just over one third of that capacity was available on average, largely owing to the dilapidated conditions of the system due to lack of maintenance. Consequently, only two thirds of the estimated demand of about 100 MW could be met. Private firms had been forced to purchase and maintain their own generators in the face of recurring electric power shortages, which raised their fixed and operating costs. By the end of 1995, however, some improvements were made in maintenance and in the distribution system in the capital, although output remained limited. Power production was expected to increase further in early 1996, thanks to the installation of new generators and the repair of existing plants, funded by foreign aid.
The transport system also suffers from a decade of neglect and requires major rehabilitation. The antiquated port of Port-au-Prince is reputedly the most expensive port in the Caribbean, negatively affecting trade activity.
Telecommunications are almost non-existent outside the capital. Haiti's telephone network consists of 55,000 lines for a population of 7 million (compared to 440,000 lines in the Dominican Republic for the same population size); this is the lowest penetration rate (0.8 per cent) in Latin America. Moreover, the quality of service is inadequate. Water and sanitation conditions, as well as the education and health systems, are also highly deficient. The lack of skilled labour seriously inhibits economic competitiveness.
The capacity of the Government to build or rebuild and to operate the economic infrastructure of Haiti is currently quite limited. Moreover, as elsewhere in the world, there is a greater appreciation of the potential benefits of private initiative in contestable markets for public utilities (see chaps. X and XI
below). The Government is thus seeking to increase the role of the private sector through a restructuring plan developed in conjunction with several multilateral institutions, involving the privatization of some assets and for others the introduction of private management through management contracts, leases or other contractual arrangements. The plan will probably require a modification of the existing regulatory environment, tariff policies and quality standards.
Foreign donors have committed over $400 million to support the rehabilitation of energy, transport and urban infrastructure.
In sum, since the restoration of constitutional order in October 1994, the international community has committed considerable financial and technical resources to the development of Haiti. So far, most resources have been directed towards balance of payments support, emergency humanitarian assistance and governance, including electoral support. As international cooperation moves from the emergency stage to a longer-term approach, assistance for development will take centre stage, particularly to improve capacity for efficient government operations. But the ultimate goal is to recharge the development potential of the economy as a whole, which means that priority must be given to the creation of a favourable environment for the development of private initiative, in the form of both small-scale farms and enterprises and larger establishments. It is a formidable task.
South Africa has been experiencing a remarkable political transition from being a beleaguered State under apartheid to becoming a non-racialist, democratic country with multiple economic opportunities, what many in the country refer to as "the new South Africa". 26 The country is also facing an economic transition, and progress in the two are intertwined. But political stability ultimately depends on a more equal distribution of government services and economic opportunities and a lower unemployment rate. Indeed, one of the strongest incentives for political integration is that a major political crisis might drive the country into a violent conflict that nobody wants to contemplate.
The goodwill that is created by the need to avoid such a scenario spills over into investment commitments, despite the kinds of uncertainty that normally accompany new political and economic departures and that delay investment elsewhere. The success of South Africa's political transition, the confidence that the Government is able to inspire in its policies and a number of economic factors have combined to bring about a swift increase in fixed investment.
The political transition was secured in 1993, when agreement was reached on a Government of National Unity, which was to be established after the election of April 1994. A Transitional Executive Council was installed in December 1993, which gave blacks a role in Government for the first time in the history of the country, and an interim constitution was adopted. After those developments, United Nations sanctions were repealed by the General Assembly in its resolution 48/1 of 8 October 1993.
According to various indicators, the prospects of a peaceful transition raised spirits in the country. The index of business confidence started an upward trend, and the financial rand started to strengthen at the end of 1992. South Africa had maintained a dual exchange rate, with a commercial rand for current transactions and a financial rand for capital transactions by foreigners.
The financial rand had traded at a discount from the commercial rand, reflecting net disinvestment pressures internationally, and the discount had been shrinking during 1993.27 Consumer confidence also commenced an upward trend in 1993, as reflected in an increase in private expenditures on durable and semidurable goods, partly financed by the wider availability of consumer credit.
Despite some apprehension surrounding the April 1994 elections, the new Government was able to quickly reduce the level of political and economic uncertainty and gain the confidence of economic actors by, for example, keeping the budget deficit in check and adopting a pragmatic attitude towards privatization.
Moreover, the rate of increase of consumer prices dropped in 1993 to a single-digit level for the first time in 19 years, and remained at that level in 1994 and 1995 despite weather-related fluctuations in food prices.
After the April 1994 elections, the amount of politically related violence declined - although crime increased - and in 1995, the number of man-days lost due to strikes reached its lowest point since 1988, while the business confidence index reached its highest level in 10 years.
The financial rand was smoothly abolished in March 1995, after the discount had been significantly reduced and foreign-exchange reserves had risen to $1.8 billion as of the end of February 1995, giving a further boost to confidence in the Government's economic policy. Foreign-exchange controls have continued to be gradually loosened since then but have not been abandoned altogether.
The business community in South Africa is calling for swift and complete removal of all remaining foreign-exchange controls on residents, but the central bank has resisted because it wants to avoid a sudden and large outflow of resident capital.
In other words, despite the generally positive atmosphere, considerable uncertainty resides just below the surface. Indeed, the value of the rand (R)
dropped abruptly in February 1996, triggered by a false rumour that the President had suffered a heart attack and the expectation that the end of foreign exchange controls was imminent. From the abolishment of the financial rand until that episode, the exchange rate had been quite stable; in fact, there had been some upward pressure in 1995 as a result of large capital inflows amounting to $6 billion, although appreciation of the rand had been partly contained by an increase in demand for foreign exchange by importers of machinery and equipment.
The real as well as the financial economy began to improve in 1993 (see table VIlL8): the South African economy ended a four-year long recession in May. GDP growth was at first primarily fuelled by a rapid recovery in the agricultural sector after a drought in 1992, but growth became broad-based rather quickly and has since been sustained. As a result, the capacity utilization rate rose from 77 per cent in September 1992 to 83 per cent in September 1995.
Exports have been particularly dynamic, stimulated by the recovery in the developed economies beginning in 1994, the improvement in the terms of trade beginning in mid-1992, and the lifting of sanctions. The volume of merchandise exports rose by 22 per cent in 1993 and by 8 per cent in 1994. They continued to rise in 1995, albeit at a slower rate owing to lower gold exports and the impact of a new drought on agricultural exports. The rise in exports has been especially fast for base metals, minerals, chemicals, machinery, and paper and pulp, with sales burgeoning to developing countries, such as Brazil, India, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Malaysia, the Republic of Korea and Zimbabwe.
With the exception of Zimbabwe, however, exports to those countries increased from a very low base.

Gross domestic fixed investment (GDFI) in constant prices had recorded an almost continuous decline between 1982 and 1993 as a result of political uncertainty, slow economic growth, the intensification of economic sanctions and capital outflows. But real GDFI began to recover in the second quarter of 1993, although it declined again for the year as a whole. In the initial phase of the upturn, investment was largely limited to a number of large capital-intensive projects and investment by public enterprises, which have been extending telecommunication and electricity networks to deprived areas.
Real GDFI increased by 9 per cent in 1994 (see table VIlL8), with growth accelerating during the year: it grew by double digits during the last three quarters of 1994, and by more than 18 per cent in the last two quarters. Even in agriculture, GDFI increased in real terms in 1994 despite uncertainty surrounding the formulation of property rights to land in the new Constitution which was negotiated to meet a May 1996 deadline. In 1995, the increase in investment spread to nearly all sectors of the economy. Investment thus seems to be on a very positive track, although in view of the decade-long fall in real investment, the share of GDFI in GDP is still more than 10 percentage points below the high ofthe early 1980s.
A number of factors fuelled the rise in investment:29 one was the improvement in the political situation; and another was the rise in GDP and capacity utilization, as noted above. Both factors, in combination with high interest rates, also attracted new foreign capital inflows, and in 1994, when other developing countries were beginning to experience smaller capital inflows, South Africa recorded its first surplus on capital account since 1984.
South Africa had earlier been outside the circle of countries with significant access to international capital for two reasons: the international sanctions and the residual effects of a debt crisis. South Africa had entered into its debt crisis when in September 1985 the Government announced that it would not repay principal on about half of its debt to foreign commercial banks (the socalled debt standstill). In September 1993, however, an agreement with its commercial creditors was reached on a final rescheduling of the outstanding debt. Under previous arrangements, South Africa repaid part of the frozen debt and continued to meet all its obligations on the debt outside the moratorium.
Consequently, indicators of debt burden have all decreased substantially since 1985, and since 1992 South Africa has enjoyed a ratio of debt service to exports of about 10 per cent.
Another factor in the increase in investment has been Government policy to encourage particular types or locations of investment. For example, tax incentives have been offered for very large, capital-intensive projects. Section 37e of the Income Tax Act (valid until September 1993) was intended to encourage investment, by way of capital depreciation allowances, in projects aimed at adding value to primary commodities; in 1992 alone, investments worth R 11 billion ($3.9 billion) were approved for such projects which were also assisted by tariffs and subsidized inputs, such as electricity.
Construction on a number of those capital-intensive projects began in 1993 and 1994. For instance, the Alusaf aluminium smelter and the Columbus stainless steel mill together accounted for R 8.5 billion, approximately 12.5 per cent of GDFI in 1994. The projects typically entailed joint arrangements between one of the large South African conglomerates and the Industrial Development Corporation of South Africa Limited (IDC).
Another driving force behind the investment revival has been the policy of the Government to invest in infrastructure in deprived areas. The Reconstruction and Development Programme (RDP) of the new Government focuses on a number of areas, such as health care, education, housing, telecommunications, electrification and water, in order to alleviate poverty, reduce inequality and rectify the apartheid legacy.One of the more successful aspects of RDP is electrification.
The State-owned electricity company ESKOM, which has excess generating capacity, electrified about 750,000 homes in the period from 1993 to 1995, funded by its own resources. In addition to ESKOM, local authorities are also establishing electricity connections the exact number of which is not known, which have stimulated the demand for durable consumer goods.
Finally, trade is fuelling investment, and investment is also fuelling trade since investment has a high import content. The lifting of sanctions has created new export possibilities, and investment has been particularly high in exportoriented sectors, such as the above-mentioned mineral-processing projects.
Investment is also taking place as a result of increased and expected competition from imports and foreign direct investment.
After a long period of import-substitution policies behind protective walls during the apartheid era, the new Government is committed to a gradualliberalization of trade in order to improve the competitiveness of the South African economy. It has lowered tariffs on a number of products, and has subscribed to the agreements reached under the Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations.
The Government is phasing out the General Export Incentives Scheme, which will be terminated on 31 December 1997. A free-trade area with the European Union was also to be negotiated. Moreover, the Minister of Trade and Industry proposed in June 1995 to reduce tariffs in two of the most protected sectors, textiles and clothing and motor vehicles, over a period of 8 and 7 years, respectively, in the light of which significant restructuring programmes have been initiated in the two sectors. Thus, the Textile Federation plans to spend R 3 billion on capital goods, retraining and reorganization, and car manufacturers are intending to spend R 5 billion on new products and modernization in the next five years.
But however encouraging those investment plans and investment trends to date may be, there is a major concern in South Africaabout whether they will contribute enough in one politically crucial dimension, the creation of employment.
In particular, the employment created in the capital-intensive projects noted above has been relatively small even when direct and indirect employment creation are combined.
The Government is increasingly concerned about the high unemployment rate, which was estimated at 33 per cent in 1995. Total employment declined by 7 per cent between 1989 and 1994, with two large sectors being particularly affected: manufacturing employment declined by 10 per cent between 1989 and December 1993 and has only increased slowly since then, while mining employment continues the decline that started in 1987.
The Government was expected to reveal in April 1996 a strategy for increasing the GDP growth rate to a sustainable annual rate of 6 per cent and creating 500,000 jobs per year by the year 2000. Among other things, the strategy is expected to increase substantially investment in education, training, infrastructure and the restructuring of industries and the public sector.

The assumption in making a separate study of investment in countries that are emerging from periods of severe civil strife and war is that there are inherent and important differences between the individual experiences of those countries and other countries that have been discussed in this part of World Economic and Social Survey. Indeed, while the four countries studied in the present chapter are all developing countries and broadly subject to the same considerations as the six countries discussed in the previous chapter, they do have unique features as well.
Their greatest distinction is the absolute imperative to use public policy to knit together a society that has until recently been torn by conflict and that can return to a state of conflict at any time. The politics of decision-making about policy in such situations means that although it may be harder to attain than in non-conflict situations, a workable consensus is essential. That may limit the capacity of Governments to reach decisions, but then the legacy of years of conflict may also limit the ability of Governments to implement the decisions that they make.
International support seems to have been fundamental for strengthening post-conflict regimes. In the case of South Africa, for example, the genuine warmth with which South Africa was welcomed back into the community of nations not to mention international sporting circles, seems to have bolstered the capacity of the Government to act. But the economic wealth and level of institutional development in South Africa are also unique among the four case studies; in the other three countries, after the elimination of international sanctions and other economic barriers, direct financial assistance has been essential.
In most cases, in other words, the Government's ability to borrow or to tax the depressed income of its citizens is very limited. Aid relieves the fiscal budget constraint, allowing needed current expenditure, especially for increasing local security - and public investment in infrastructure. Some forms of foreign assistance - mine clearance is a prime example - can make an indispensable contribution to returning productive assets to their appropriate functioning, while allowing people to return to living more normal lives. Both current expenditure and investment that serves to reintegrate combatants into the economic mainstream have the double pay-off of yielding a direct economic benefit and reducing uncertainty that the peace can be maintained and deepened.
Indeed, it is with that in mind that the United Nations employs the term "post-conflict peace-building".
Revival of private investment in a post-conflict economy is not automatic.
Liquidity, however, is seldom a binding constraint on private investment.
On the contrary, during years of political turmoil and civil war, entrepreneurs typically transfer their wealth to stable countries, usually as very liquid assets, such as stocks, bonds or certificates of deposit; in extreme cases, they migrate with their wealth. Domestic and foreign investors who have shunned a society in conflict might be expected to embrace it upon the arrival of peace.
Before committing funds for investment, however, private investors not only look for peace but also for evidence of political stability and a climate that is attractive to investment. The resumption of private investment thus depends very much on the existence of peace and stability, but peace and political stability also depend on investment, which is in particular required to create productive employment for ex-combatants. Initially, much of that investment must be public investment, but private investment can also quickly come to playa role.
Macroeconomic stability is also important - sometimes even essential but is not enough by itself to attract investment. Many decisions to invest are to a great extent irreversible; in such cases, once an entrepreneur commits funds to a project it is costly to withdraw if circumstances change. For that reason, investors tend to invest first in projects that are more easily wound up or moved, or where the short-term returns are very attractive, such as rehabilitation of housing and new housing construction, depending on the situation.
Investors abhor uncertainty - they will either avoid it or act in anticipation of profits high enough to compensate for it - and nothing creates more uncertainty than the possibility that policies may be reversed. Clearly defined property rights, for example, mean little unless there is a high probability that such rights will be respected in the future. Equally important is reliance on clear rules and regulations that limit the range for bureaucratic discretion in implementing policy. Investors expect to know that rules exist and that they are applicable to all firms operating in similar circumstances. The risk of policy reversal is greatest when an electorate is divided and without any consensus regarding basic economic rules of the game. All of which constitutes the political side to the economic policy of post-conflict peace-building.
On the economic side, the overall rate of inflow of foreign assistance, in conjunction with the inflows of private funds, raises macroeconomic considerations;
that is, an inflow of foreign aid increases the supply of foreign exchange in the economy. If the flow is large relative to the size of the economy and is mainly spent on domestic, non-tradable goods and services, it can complicate the macroeconomic situation. The local currency will appreciate, if not nominally then at least in real terms through inflation. Private investment will then be directed excessively toward the production of non-tradables, particularly residential housing and commerce, rather than the export sector.
A sudden fall in international aid could precipitate the opposite effect: a sharp depreciation of the currency, requiring adjustment to a new set of relative prices, which would provide incentives for the production of exports and import substitutes. The point is that sharp fluctuations in the real exchange rate raise uncertainty about what the real exchange rate will be and thus have an adverse effect on private investment.
The obvious conclusion is that there needs to be a macroeconomic dimension to the programming of aid disbursements. By the same token, aid levels should be decreased slowly over time, rather than precipitously. As business confidence grows, private savings - some domestic, some foreign - should replace international aid as sources of investment finance, permitting a country's rate of investment to continue to be maintained or raised.
In sum, investment in a post-conflict economy tends to be directed to housing and commerce because of the high profitability of those sectors when large capital inflows appreciate the real exchange rate. Investment also tends to go into easily reversible projects because of the effect of uncertainty. The initial revival of investment thus manifests itself in a construction boom (both commercial and residential), commerce, light manufacturing and assembly (includingexport processing), and very short-term investments in agriculture (grains instead of permanent crops, poultry instead of beef cattle). The irreversibility of commitments to long-term projects in agriculture and manufacturing makes them more risky. Over time, however, they can also be expected to appear as responses to a combination of price incentives, clear rules and business confidence that policies will not be reversed in the future. The challenge for postconflict societies is to move from the initial revival of investment to one that is mainly driven by private saving and that generates sustained, sustainable and well-distributed increases in incomes and output.
Among the unprecedented changes that have characterized the twentieth century, the increased tendency of the people of the world to live in urban areas is certainly one of the most salient. It is estimated that in 1900, when the world's population stood at 1. 7 billion people, only 13 per cent of all persons on earth lived in areas that could be classified as urban.' According to current projections, by the year 2000 the world's population is expected to reach 6.2 billion people, nearly 48 per cent of whom will live in urban areas.2 Consequently, not only has the twentieth century witnessed an unprecedented increase in the proportion of people living in urban areas but, in addition, the number of urban-dwellers has risen markedly, passing from 220 million in 1900 to an expected 2.9 billion by the year 2000. In terms of population dynamics, three distinct types of processes have contributed to the growth of the world's urban population, namely, the natural increase of the population living in urban areas, the fact that urban areas have been net gainers of population through migration, and the transformation of rural areas into urban settlements.
Natural increase results from the excess of births over deaths in a given population. During this century, natural increase has been high in many of the world's developing countries, especially as a result of the major reductions in mortality achieved through better means of combating key infectious and parasitic diseases. To the extent that reductions in mortality occurred earlier and were more widespread in urban than in rural areas, the former tended to grow more rapidly as a result of natural increase than the latter. However, in many developing countries, the decline in mortality has been followed, albeit with a considerable lag, by sizeable reductions in fertility that have tended to be more marked in urban than in rural areas. Consequently, in countries in which the transition from high to low fertility is fairly advanced, urban areas are likely to grow more slowly because of natural increase than their rural counterparts, though actual differences between the two will also depend on the distinct distributions by age of their respective populations.
The second process leading to urban population growth is perhaps the one that attracts the most attention because it involves the relocation of persons from rural to urban areas. However, the movement of persons between rural and urban areas is not unidirectional and always involves both flows from rural to urban areas and those from urban to rural areas. In terms of the growth of the urban population, it is the difference between rural-urban and urban-rural migration that matters and such a difference, which is usually positive, is denominated net rural-urhan migration.
Lastly, the third key process leading hoth to the geographical and to the demographic expansion of urhan areas is the transformation of rural areas into urhan centres. Such transformation usually occurs as a result of changes in the patterns of settlement in a given location, changes that are often associated with the development of infrastructure, the expansion of productive activities not related to agriculture, or the growth of commercial and administrative activities. In many respects, it is the transformation of rural settlements into urhan centres that underlies much of the urhanization trend that is reflected in the numbers cited above.
A wide range of factors contribute to urhanization and there are extensive writings on this suhject. These encompass studies of particular countries or urhan areas, as well as theoretical constructs that are intended to he of general validity. The purpose of the present chapter is not to contribute to the theoretical and empirical explanations of urbanization, but rather to descrihe what lies behind the statistical information and the United Nations projections on the subject.
This chapter reviews the available data on the trends in urbanization, including decomposition by region and country and by different components; it also explains the methodology that is used to ohtain these data and reviews its strengths and weaknesses. Urhanization is a critical dimension of development in every country of the world and the data are an indispensable starting-point for any examination of this process.

Every two years, the Population Division of the United Nations Secretariat produces a complete set of estimates and projections of the overall number of urban-dwellers in each country of the world. The set of estimates has consistently covered a period beginning with 1950 and ending at different points according to the most recent information available for each country. The projection period, which reached the year 2000 in earlier publications, has 
recently been extended to the year 2025. The production of a complete set of estimates of the urban population has been made possible by the wider availability of information derived from population censuses, which remain the major source of data on the size and geographical distribution of a country's population.
During most of this century, such a complete set of estimates of the size of the urban population in the world was not available. Estimates relative to the early parts of the century (1900 to 1925) were made in the 1970s,4 but they only indicate general orders of magnitude. During the 1950s and 1960s, as population censuses began to be carried out on a more regular basis by increasing numbers of countries, the possibility of deriving a more comprehen- sive set of national estimates of the levels and trends of urbanization improved.
In general, the basic measures necessary to assess the dynamics of urban- ization are (a) the level of urbanization, which is the proportion of a country's population living in urban areas and (b) the rate of urbanization, which is the average annual rate of change of the urban proportion. Estimates of the level of urbanization can be obtained from information on the total population of a country and that part of the population living in urban areas at a particular time. Estimates of the rate of urbanization require that the proportion of the population living in urban areas be available for at least two points in time (that is, from two censuses).
The procedure for using such information to derive projections, described in box IX.l, results in a logistic time path for the proportion urban that has 1 as a maximum asymptotic value but reaches this limit at a dampened rate. It provides a parsimonious means of projecting the urban population of the countries of the world on the basis of the minimal available information.5 Although there have been no formal assessments of the accuracy of the results obtained, it is worth noting that when the world's urban population was first projected in the late 1970s using the United Nations method, the urban proportion of world population was expected to reach 46 per cent by 1990, a figure than can be compared with the 43 per cent urban presented as the global estimate for 1990 in the 1994 revision of World Urbanization Prospects.6 Consequently, it would appear that the 1980 set of projections overestimated somewhat the rate of urbanization over the period 1960-1990 in comparison with the most recent data set.
It is important to note, however, that the estimates for 1990 presented in the 1994 revision are based on quite incomplete information. Out of the 222 countries or areas into which the world was divided in 1994, only 136 had information on the proportion urban referring to the period 1986-1993. Among the rest, for 67 countries the most recent information available referred to the period 1976-1985, for a further 17 it referred to 1966-1975 and for 2 it referred to years prior to 1965. Although the countries with recent information included the majority of those with large population sizes, lack of 1990 data for nearly 40 per cent of all countries or areas of the world cannot be discounted as a possible source of biases.
Another important point to bear in mind in analysing the results of the estimation and projection of the urban population is that there is no single operational definition of "urban" at the national level. The United Nations has compiled and published the definitions used for statistical purposes by the countries and areas constituting the world. In most cases (112 out of 222), the definitions available are based on administrative considerations equating urban areas with the capitals of provinces or with regions under the jurisdiction of certain types of local authority. However, in many such cases, the definitions provided are imprecise, as when they refer only to "urban centres", "towns with proclaimed legal limits", "localities designated" or "cities, urban agglomerations and urban communes".7 In a further 53 cases, urban areas are distinguished from rural ones on the basis of population size and, in some cases, in terms of population density. However, the lower limit over which a settlement is considered urban varies between 200 and 50,000 persons. Thus, there is little homogeneity in the identification of urban settlements. In 32 countries or areas (including all the successor States of the former Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR)), explicit mention is made of certain indicators of urban character, such as the proportion of the labour force employed in non-agricul tural activities or the availability of urban facilities (streets, water-supply systems, sewerage systems or electric lighting). Lastly, in 22 cases no definition of "urban" was provided and in another 3 all of the population was considered to be either urban or rural, depending on the circumstances.
In addition to estimating and projecting the size of the urban population of each country or area of the world, the United Nations also projects the sizes of specific cities or urban agglomerations. The procedure used is an extension of that described in box IX.l to project the proportion urban and relies on projecting the proportion of a country's population living in a particular city.s Because the growth rates of specific cities tend to be subject to greater variability than those of the total urban population, the city projections are more likely to deviate from actual outcomes than those pertaining to the urban population as a whole. With these caveats in mind, the following sections provide an overview of the current state of urbanization in the world's different regions and of the developments expected during the next 20 years.

Developed countries are highly urbanized. It is estimated that in 1995, three quarters of the population in developed countries lived in urban areas and that by 2015 four out of every five persons living in developed countries will be city dwellers (see table IX.l). During 1975-1995, the rate of growth of the urban population in developed countries averaged 0.9 per cent per annum which, albeit low, still surpassed the rate of growth of the total population in the developed world by over 60 per cent. Because of the prevalence of low natural increase and relatively large losses due to net rural-urban migration, the rural population of developed countries has been decreasing at a rate of 0.4 per cent per year since 1975. In contrast, the urban areas of developed countries have been gaining, on average, 7.2 million people every year, a gain that is expected to decline to 5.8 million annually during 1995-2015.
According to the urbanization trends observed in developed countries until the middle of this century, it was thought that the increasing concentration of the urban population in the larger urban places was a natural concomitant of increases in the proportion of people living in urban areas. Yet, during the late 1960s, 1970s and early 1980s, a tendency towards population deconcentration was noticed in a number of developed countries. Berry9 coined the term "counterurbanization"
to denote the process by which the larger metropolitan areas lost population, at least in relative terms, to smaller urban regions. The widespread shift towards counterurbanization was first detected in the United States of America where, between the 1960s and 1970-1973, non-metropolitan areas registered a turnaround in net migration from net annual losses of 0.3 million to net annual gains of 0.4 million.During the 1970s, the population in large metropolitan areas of the United States grew at half the rate of mediumsized and smaller metropolitan areas, with non-metropolitan areas outpacing the metropolitan aggregate.ll Other studies confirmed that similar developments were occurring in different developed countries, including Australia, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Norway and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, though the scale and timing of the phenomenon, and to some extent its nature, differed from country to country.
Despite the expectation that the shift away from concentration in the larger metropolitan areas towards medium-sized and small settlements would accelerate during the 1980s, recent evidence has failed to corroborate such a trend and suggests that the tendency towards population concentration in the larger urban places has returned. The most significant reversal seems to have taken place in the United States during the 1980s, though there is also evidence that the growth rates of the Paris agglomeration and of London have increased in recent years.
Although the causes of both counterurbanization and the return of population concentration in larger metropolitan areas remain largely to be elucidated, several suggestions have been advanced.On the one hand, the fertility declines registered during the 1960s, which tended to be more accentuated in metropolitan areas, contributed to reducing the growth of those areas relative to that of other urban centres. On the other hand, the growing levels of international migration, particularly during the late 1980s, coupled with the tendency of international migrants to settle in metropolitan areas, helped to accentuate the traditional form of population concentration. Yet, changes in internal migration remain the key element leading to counterurbanization and its reversal.
The underlying causes of those changes include the new spatial division of labour stemming from the changing structure of corporate organization that has made possible the relocation of manufacturing away from major industrial centres.
The successful development of economic activity based in rural areas, particularly that associated with energy resource development, agriculture and forestry, was also a factor contributing to counterurbanization during the 1970s, especially in the United States. Changing residential preferences associated with changes in the age structure of the population appear to have played a role as well. Lastly, government actions regarding infrastructure investment, including the expansion of transportation networks and the improvement of health and educational services in smaller communities; the support provided for agriculture, forestry and rural development in general;
and the adoption of decentralization policies and "new town" developmentall contributed to the fuelling of counterurbanization. However, the economic downturn that affected much of the developed world during the late 1970s and early 1980s weakened the commitment of Governments to those policies, and their subsequent deregulation of various elements of economic activity and service provision are likely to have renewed the advantages associated with the concentration of business, and consequently of population, in large metropolitan areas.

In 1995, 74 per cent of the population of Latin America and the Caribbean lived in urban areas, a proportion comparable to that of the developed world.
Latin America has traditionally been the most urbanized region of the developing world. In 1975, the 61 per cent of its population living in urban areas was equivalent to the corresponding proportion determined for developed countries in 1960. Thus, Latin America experienced the same change in the level of urbanization in 20 years as developed countries experienced over the course of 35 years. During 1995-2015, both groups of countries are expected to follow similar urbanization paths, reaching similar levels of urbanization by 2015 (see table IX.l).
As in other developing regions, there is considerable variation in the level of urbanization of the different countries of Latin America and the Caribbean.
In Antigua and Barbuda, Guyana, Haiti and Montserrat, over 60 per cent of the population still live in rural areas. At the other end of the spectrum, over 80 per cent of the population in countries like Argentina, Chile, Uruguay and Venezuela live in urban areas.
Although the rural population in Latin America and the Caribbean increased slightly during 1975-1995, nearly all population growth in the region occurred in urban areas (see table IX.2). Between 1995 and 2015, the rural population in Latin America is expected to decrease, implying that the expected population gains made by urban areas will surpass the total growth of the region's population (see table IX.3). Thus, the increase of urban areas in the region is expected to remain at about 8.4 million persons annually during 1995-2015, whereas the region's total population is expected to grow by a lower 8 million persons every year.
A salient characteristic of the distribution of the urban population of Latin America and the Caribbean is that it tends to be more concentrated in large cities than that of other major developing regions. Thus, in 1995, 20 per cent of Latin America's urban population resided in agglomerations of at least 5 million people, whereas only 16 per cent of the urban population of developing Asia and 8 per cent of that of Africa were concentrated in cities of that size (table IX.4). In addition, 52 per cent of Latin America's urban population resided in cities of less than half a million inhabitants in 1995, compared with 58 per cent both in Africa and in developing Asia. The tendency of the urban population to be highly concentrated in a single city is particularly marked in Argentina, Bolivia, Chile, Costa Rica, Cuba, the Dominican Republic, Panama, Peru, Puerto Rico and Uruguay, where over a quarter of the urban population lived in the capital city in 1995.
The tendency towards population concentration in a single city has been seen as a manifestation of economies of scale that contribute to increase economic efficiency and growth. Such concentration has generally been the result of a number of national policies favouring large cities as the preferred sites for industrial development and as the centres of finance and communications.1sIn Latin America and the Caribbean, the rate of growth of the population in major cities of the region generally peaked during the 1950s or 1960s, when fertility levels were still relatively high and industrialization was being fostered within a development model favouring import substitution. The evidence available suggests that the trend towards fertility reduction first took hold in the largest cities of each country and that, in general, fertility in the large urban agglomerations remains below the national average. 16 However, the reduction in net migration rates that has been recorded in certain large cities since the 1970s implies that natural increase has become their major source of population growth. Indeed, some major cities have seen their share of the urban population decline in recent years. 17 That is the case of Buenos Aires, Havana and Montevideo since 1980, and a similar trend is expected for a number of other major Latin American cities during the 1990s.According to recent census information, steep reductions in net migration gains have been experienced by Mexico City, Rio de Janeiro and Santiago (Chile).19 At the same time, mediumsized and small urban centres have seen their population growth increase.

In 1995, the population of developing Asia amounted to 3.3 billion persons, 58 per cent of the world's total population. The region as a whole has a great deal of heterogeneity, comprising as it does some of the most urbanized countries or areas in the world, such as Bahrain, Hong Kong, Israel, Kuwait, Qatar and Singapore with more than 90 per cent of their population living in urban areas, and some of the least urbanized, such as Bhutan, East Timor and Nepal with less than 14 per cent of their population classified as urban in 1995. In addition, Asia includes some of the most populous countries in the world, such as Bangladesh, China, India, Indonesia and Pakistan. These five countries have relatively low levels ofurbanization (under 36 per cent) and their weight in terms of population size is largely responsible for producing a level of urbanization of only 35 per cent for the region as a whole (see table IX.l).
Despite its relatively low level of urbanization, Asia accounts for 46 per cent of the world's urban population, amounting to 1.2 billion persons in 1995, a number higher than the current urban population of the developed world (see table IX.3). In 1975, when the level of urbanization in developing Asia stood at only 22 per cent (see table IX.l), its urban population already amounted to 508 million persons or nearly 70 per cent of the number of urban-dwellers in developed countries. By 2015, developing Asia is expected to host slightly over 2 billion urban-dwellers, accounting for half of the world's urban population, and to have twice as many urban-dwellers as the developed world.
The high levels of urban population growth experienced by Asia have been accompanied by moderate levels of growth among the rural population. During 1975-1995, the urban population of developing Asia grew at an annual rate of 3.9 per cent and is expected to keep on growing at a level of 3.1 per cent annually during 1995-2015. The equivalent rates of growth of the rural population are 1.1 and 0.2 per cent, respectively. Thus, although Asia's rural population is expected to keep on growing well into the twenty-first century, a significant decline in its rate of growth is expected. Nevertheless, by 2015 the rural population of developing Asia is still expected to exceed that in urban areas by about 14 per cent or over 280 million persons, despite the fact that China is likely to experience a reduction in its rural population of about 87 million persons over the next 20 years.
The sizeable difference between the rate of growth of the urban population and that of the rural population of Asia is translated into a moderately high rate of growth in the urban share of population. Thus, during 1975-2015 developing Asia is expected to record the highest rate of urbanization among the major world regions, amounting to 1.9 per cent per year. Such an urbanization rate implies that the proportion of the population living in urban areas in developing Asia will more than double between 1975 and 2015, passing from 22 to 47 per cent.
As already noted, there are sharp differences in the levels of urbanization characterizing the different subregions of Asia. Data for Eastern Asia are largely dominated by China, a country that in 1995 constituted 35 per .cent of Asia's total population and 31 per cent of Asia's urban population. During 1975-1995, partly as a result of the reclassification of rural into urban areas, China's rate of urbanization averaged 2.8 per cent annually and surpassed that recorded by other Asian countries. Because the extent of reclassification is expected to abate in the future, China's urbanization rate is projected to decrease to 2.2 per cent per year during 1995-2015, so that its share of the total urban population in Asia will remain nearly constant until 2015 at about 31 per cent. Despite its rapid urbanization rate, the population of China is expected to be only 47 per cent urban by 2015.
South-Eastern Asia is a fairly heterogeneous region that comprises some of the most dynamic economies in the Asian region as well as some of the region's least developed countries. Although its level of urbanization in 1975 was fairly low - 22 per cent - it grew at an annual rate of 2.1 per cent during 1975-1995, to reach 34 per cent. By 2015, 49 per cent of South-Eastern Asia's population is expected to live in urban areas, despite a decline in the rate of urbanization during 1995-2015. The rural population in the region, which grew at an annual rate of 1.2 per cent during 1975-1995, will continue to grow, albeit at a very low rate (0.2 per cent per year).
In 1995, South-central Asia was the second most populous subregion of Asia, comprising three of the most populous countries in the world:
Bangladesh, India and Pakistan. Urbanization in South-central Asia has been traditionally low, with only 22 per cent of the population living in urban centres in 1975. Although the region is one of the few whose rate of urbanization is expected to increase between 1975-1995 and 1995-2015, by 2015 only 40 per cent of the population will likely live in urban areas. At 3.4 per cent annually during 1975-1995, the urbanization rate has been especially high in Bangladesh, one of the least urbanized countries of the subregion. Although that rate is expected to decrease to 2.8 per cent annually during 1995-2015, Bangladesh will still experience more than a threefold increase in the proportion urban (from 9 to 32 per cent) between 1975 and 2015. In comparison, India and Pakistan are expected to register more moderate gains, with the proportion urban rising from 21 to 37 per cent in India and from 26 to 49 per cent in Pakistan during the same period. One salient feature of South-central Asia is that its rural population is expected to keep on growing at relatively high rates. Thus, whereas the rural population of the region exceeded that of the developing countries in Eastern Asia by 85 million persons in 1995, it will surpass the latter by 364 million in 2015. South-central Asian countries are therefore faced with the double burden of accommodating a growing rural population as they cope at the same time with increasing levels of urbanization.
Western Asia, with 66 per cent of its population living in urban areas in 1995, is the only subregion of the continent with more than half of its population living in urban centres. However, there is also considerable variation within the subregion, with Oman having only 13 per cent of its population in urban areas and Kuwait having 97 per cent. Most of the population growth experienced by Western Asia has taken place in urban areas and this pattern is expected to continue.
Between 1995 and 2015, the urban population of the region will increase by 78 per cent, whereas that in rural areas will barely rise by 4 per cent.
The process of urbanization in the most populous countries of Asia, by fostering population concentration, has given rise to some of the largest urban agglomerations in the developing world. Thus, in 1975, developing Asia included seven cities with at least 5 million people, compared with Latin America which included four and Africa which had one (see table IX.4). In fact, Asia was the only developing region with one city of more than 10 million inhabitants (Shanghai in China) in 1975. By 1995, there were 7 such cities in the developing countries of Asia (Beijing, Shanghai and Tianjin in China;
Bombay and Calcutta in India; Jakarta in Indonesia; and Seoul in the Republic of Korea) and their number is expected to increase, by the year 2015, to 16 out of the anticipated total of 23 in all developing countries. Yet, the concentration of the urban population in megacities coexists with relatively high proportions of that population living in smaller urban centres. Thus, in 1995 about 58 per cent of all urban residents in Asia lived in cities of less than half a million persons and even by 2015 those cities are expected to account for 54 per cent of all urban-dwellers in the region.

Africa, with 34 per cent of its population living in urban areas in 1995, had a slightly higher level of urbanization than developing Asia. Africa's urbanization rate was lower than that experienced by the developing countries of Asia during 1975-1995 (1.6 versus 2 per cent per annum), but that difference is expected to become less accentuated during 1995-2015. By the end of that period, Africa is expected to have about the same proportion of its population living in urban areas (47 per cent) as developing Asia (see table IX.l). Just as in Asia, there is considerable variation in the level of urbanization of the subregions of Africa, with Eastern Africa having only 22 per cent of its population living in urban areas and Southern Africa having 48 per cent. Southern Africa is expected to remain the most urbanized subregion of the continent, followed closely by Northern Africa (their respective levels of urbanization by 2015 are likely to be 60 and 57 per cent). The other Mrican subregions - Middle and Western Africa - are estimated to have 1995 levels·of urbanization similar to the continental average (see table IX.l). A number of countries in Africa have very low proportions of their population living in urban areas (below 20 per cent), including Burundi, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Malawi, the Niger, Rwanda and Uganda, among which most belong to the group of least developed countries.
The urban population of Africa has been characterized by very high rates of growth, averaging 4.4 per cent annually during 1975-1995. High growth is expected to continue during 1995-2015 (at 4.1 per cent per annum), implying that Africa's urban population will be the fastest growing in the world. Urban population growth will be particularly rapid in Eastern Africa, where the average growth rate during 1995-2015 is expected to remain at 5 per cent per year.
Relatively high rates of growth are also expected for the urban populations of Middle and Western Mrica (4.6 and 4.5 per cent, respectively). Such high growth rates imply that the urban population of Africa is doubling every 15 or 16 years, so that it will increase more than fivefold between 1975 and 2015, passing from 104 million to 568 million (see table IX.3).
In comparison with other regions, the urban population in Africa tends to be more concentrated in smaller towns and urban centres. In 1995, 58 per cent of all urban-dwellers in Africa lived in cities of half a million people or less, and only two cities in the continent had more than 5 million inhabitants (Lagos and Cairo). Although the number of large cities is projected to increase during the coming decades, Africa will remain a continent of small and medium-sized urban centres. Even by 2015, over three fifths of the urban population in Africa will still live in cities with less than one million inhabitants (see table IX.4).
Lagos, one of the two largest urban agglomerations in Africa, was the first city in the continent to become one of the 10 largest urban agglomerations in the world. In 1950, Lagos was a relatively small urban centre with just 288,000 inhabitants but by 1970, growing at a rate of nearly 10 per cent per year, it had surpassed the 2 million mark. By 1995 the population of the city was estimated to have reached 10.3 million persons and it was expected to keep on growing at over 4 per cent annually for the next 20 years, reaching 24 million persons by 2015 (when it is expected to rank third among the world's largest cities).
In contrast to Lagos, Cairo was already a large city in 1950 when it had 2.4 million inhabitants. Although its growth rate declined from 4.3 per cent annually in the 1950s to about 2.3 per cent per year in the 1980s, by 1995 Cairo had 9.7 million inhabitants. During 1995-2015, Cairo's growth rate is expected to decline further to 2 per cent per annum, and by 2015, the city's population is expected to increase to 14.5 million persons. In that year, 19 per cent of Africa's urban population is expected to be living in the 13 cities having at least 5 million inhabitants, namely, Abidjan, Addis Ababa, Alexandria, Algiers, Cairo, Casablanca, Khartoum, Kinshasa, Lagos, Luanda, Maputo, Nairobi add Tripoli.
Not only is the urban population of Africa growing at relatively high rates, but that in rural areas is also increasing substantially. Indeed, Africa is the only major region whose rural population is projected to keep on growing at moderate rates beyond 2015. In 1995, 478 million persons or two thirds of Africa's population lived in rural areas, up from 310 million in 1975 (see table IX.3). By 2015, 636 million Africans will live in rural areas and will account for nearly one fifth of the total rural population of the world. Thus, most African countries are faced with the necessity of absorbing considerable increases in their rural population even as they experience rapid urban growth.

As already noted, the growth of the urban population in a country is attributable to three types of processes: the excess of births over deaths in urban areas (natural increase); net rural-urban migration; and the reclassification of places from rural to urban as rural localities become urbanized. The United Nations efitimates the size of these components of urban growth on the basis of informatidn from consecutive censuses regarding the distribution of the population by place of residence (urban versus rural), age group and sex.

The estimation method used, which is described in detail in the publication entitled Patterns of Urban and Rural Population Growth, 20 begins with calcu- lated pro~abilitiesof surviving from one census to the next. To estimate the rel- evant prolbabilities of survival between censuses, the data for the first census are adjus~ed so that they refer to a period exactly 10 years away from that of the data for the second census. The intercensal cohort survival ratios for the whole population of the country are then calculated and adjusted to reflect a pre-established mortality differential (constant at all ages) between rural and urban areas. In particular, it is assumed that the force of mortality (that is, the instantaneous rate of death) in rural areas exceeds that in urban areas by 25 per cent at all ages and that the mortality schedule for the country as a whole has the same shape as that for urban areas. The adjusted survival ratios are subsequently used to project the urban population classified by age group and sex from the first to the second date. Then the projected urban population is compared with the actual population enumerated in urban areas. The difference between the two is assumed to represent the effect of net migration and reclassification in the intercensal period or, as it is often interpreted, the net number of migrants surviving to the second census. This method makes no allowance for the effects of international migration, thus in effect assuming that the population of the country is closed.
By reverse-projecting those surviving migrants to the mid-point of the intercensal period, an estimate of the net number of rural-urban migrants for the intercensal period is obtained?l However, for the first age group, 0-4, the estimate of the net number of migrants is obtained by applying the child/woman ratio of the urban population to the estimated net number of migrating women in the relevant age group. Once the net number of migrants is available, the net urban migration rate is obtained by dividing that number by the mid-period urban population, and the rate of natural increase of urban areas is obtained by subtracting the net migration rate from the observed growth rate of the urban population. Under these assumptions, the procedure permits the separation of two components of urban growth, namely, the part due to natural increase and the part due to both internal migration and reclassification. Without further information, however, it is not possible to distinguish the effects of migration from those of the reclassification of rural areas into urban areas.
Before discussing the application of this approach to urbanization trends, it is of interest to consider the types of biases that might result from violations of the assumptions made. If the mortality differential between urban and rural areas is larger than the 25 per cent assumed by the method, the urban mortality levels used in projecting the urban population over the relevant 10-year period will have been too high and will result in a projected urban population that is too small relative to the one that would be obtained using the correct mortality level. Hence, when the projected population is subtracted from the observed, the result will be an overestimate of the net number of migrants over the decade and therefore of the net migration rate. In addition, because the net migration rate and the rate of natural increase must add up to the growth rate of the urban population, the rate of natural increase will be underestimated.
That is, an underestimate of the difference in mortality levels between urban and rural areas leads to an overestimate of the contribution of net rural-urban migration and reclassification to the growth of urban areas. If the mortality differential was less than 25 per cent, the opposite would result.
If a country's population is not closed, the contribution of international migration to the growth of urban areas may also bias the results obtained. The effect of net international migration depends on its distribution between rural and urban areas. When international migration is distributed between urban and rural areas in a manner proportional to their respective weights over the whole population, the estimates obtained will not be biased. However, if urban areas gain more than their share of international migrants over the period being considered, the observed urban population will be larger and the number of net internal migrants to urban areas will be overestimated. The effects of net international migration losses that are disproportionately concentrated in urban areas would be the reverse, leading to underestimates of net migration.
Given that adequate estimates ofthe differential impact of international migration on rural and urban areas are generally not available, there is no basis on which adjustments could be made to prevent such biases from occurring.
Although the data requirements for the application of the method used to estimate the components of urban growth are modest, the information is either not available or inadequate for a large number of developing countries. Long intercensal intervals, delays in processing the information obtained, and changes in the definitions of urban and rural areas between one census and the next are among the factors that hinder the derivation of reliable estimates of the components of urban growth. Table IX.5 indicates the availability of census data for all those countries for which the estimation method could be applied.
As the table shows, information needed to estimate the components of urban growth for the 1960s, 1970s and 1980s was obtained for only one country in Africa (Botswana), nine countries in Latin America and three countries in Asia. For a considerably larger number of countries, information was available for at least one decade. In total, the components of urban growth could be estimated for 36 developing countries in the 1960s, 41 in the 1970s and 27 in the 1980s. However, in the cases marked by a footnote indicator in table IX.s, the method was applied to censuses that were separated by considerably more than 10 years and consequently the results obtained must be interpreted with caution.
Among countries in the African region, the components of urban growth could be estimated in 17 cases, but for 9 of them the estimates refer only to one decade, making it impossible to obtain clear trends for the region. In the case of Latin America, better availability of census data has permitted the application of the estimation method to 22 countries, producing estimates for at least two decades for almost all of them. In Asia, estimates could be calculated for 16 countries, including the most populous ones - Bangladesh, China, India, Indonesia and Pakistan - although for China and Pakistan estimates were possible only for a single decade. Given the sparse availability of data, the assessment of trends since 1960 that will be presented here can only be taken as tentative. Nevertheless, the evidence presented provides the most complete picture available to date of the changing relevance of rural-urban migration and reclassification as opposed to natural increase in determining the growth of the urban population.

Table IX.6 presents a summary of the main estimates obtained. Focusing first on the percentage of urban growth attributable to internal migration and reclassification, it is clear that there is great variability among the countries covered by the estimates available: for the 1960s, estimates vary from 9 to 77 per cent, and for the 1970s the range of variation is from 13 to 66 per cent. In terms of the median value of the distribution of countries by percentage of urban growth attributable to migration and reclassification, there seems to have been a slight decline in the importance of that component, with the median passing from 41 per cent in the 1960s to 39 per cent during the 1980s. However, given the different coverage of countries from one decade to the next and the fact that countries of very different population sizes are being considered within each decade, the median may not be the best indicator of the relevance of migration and reclassification.
Another way of assessing the relative impact of natural increase versus net migration/reclassification on the growth of the urban populations of the world's major regions is by using appropriate weights to aggregate country estimates.
Thus, the estimated rural out-migration rates22 may be weighted by the size of the rural population a.t the mid-point of the intercensal period to obtain a weighted estimate of the net number of rural-urban migrants during the period.
Similarly, the estimates of urban natural increase may be weighted by the size of the urban population at the middle of the intercensal period to obtain the net gain of births over deaths. Using weights derived from the urban and rural estimates and projections prepared by the United Nations, weighted rural outmigration rates and weighted rates of natural increase by major region and decade can be obtained together with the relative contribution of each to the growth of urban populations at the regional and world levels. Table IX.7 shows the results obtained.
As the table shows, different regions have experienced fairly different trends in natural increase and net rural out-migration rates. The most reliable estimates are those for Latin America where more countries have data for each decade. For that region, the rate of natural increase of urban areas has shown a tendency to decline from one decade to the next, a result that is consistent with trends in overall natural increase in the region. In Asia, the rate of natural increase of urban areas remained nearly constant during the 1960s and 1970s, but showed a marked decline during the 1980s. However, the 1980s estimate is the only one that contains data for China which, because of its size, is likely to affect the weighted average very substantially. For that reason, estimates for Asia excluding China are also presented. According to them, the rate of natural increase in the urban areas of the rest of Asia increased somewhat during the three decades considered. A similar trend is observed in Africa, whose estimates are the weakest because of the varying groups of countries with data for each decade. The estimates of the rate of natural increase in the urban areas of Africa can be conservatively interpreted as indicating that those rates are high and have varied little over the three decades. Once more, such an observation is consistent with what is known about trends in rates of natural increase for the region as a whole.
At the level of the developing world as a whole, the rate of natural increase of urban areas shows a moderately declining trend when China is excluded and a marked decline between the 1970s and the 1980s when China is included.
In all cases, the rates of natural increase estimated for urban areas are similar to. those estimated for the regions as a whole for the different periods considered.
Since not all countries are included in the estimates presented here, differences can be expected. However, the overall consistency of the estimates obtained with those relative to whole regions lends them credence.
Of even greater interest are the estimated rural out-migration rates, which have not been available before. At the level of the developing world, they rise from 0.61 per cent in the 1960s to 1.14 per cent in the 1980s if China is included and to 1.47 per cent in the 1980s if China is excluded. However, the trends themselves are different for each of the major developing regions considered.
Thus, in Africa, rural out-migration rates decline steadily from the 1960s to the 1980s, whereas in developing Asia they increase steadily (irrespective of whetherChina is included or not). In Latin America, in contrast, there is an increase of rural out-migration rates between the 1960s and the 1970s followed by a decline. Such trends are consistent with what is known about the economic situation of those major regions. In Africa, most economic indicators point to a deterioration of economic opportunities since the 1960s, and declining rural out-migration rates are consistent with such a scenario. It must be remembered, however, that because the rural population of Africa has been growing substantially, lower rates of rural out-migration need not mean lower numbers of net rural-urban migrants. Furthermore, the few African countries for which data are available are not necessarily representative of the continent as a whole. In fact, countries with very high rates of urban growth are underrepresented in the data used.
In Asia, the increasing rates of rural out-migration are consistent with the rising economic dynamism in the region. Furthermore, in countries such as China and Indonesia, relaxation of policies that effectively prevented ruralurban migration have contributed to rapid increases in that component of urban growth. It is important to stress, however, that rural out-migration rates in Asia were very low and are still only moderate. In contrast, rural out-migration rates in Latin America are high and their fluctuation over time is likely to be related to the declining economic opportunities that characterized the countries in the region during the 1980s.
The estimates obtained allow the calculation of the proportion of urban growth that is attributable to net internal migration and reclassification. Note, however, that because the rates of urban natural increase and the rural outmigration rates presented above have different denominators, it is not possible to obtain the percentage growth due to internal migration directly from them.
Estimates of the actual number of persons added because of natural increase and gained through net rural-urban migration and reclassification were used to derive the percentages shown in table IX.7. Those percentages corroborate that, as concluded in an earlier study, 23 natural increase accounted for about 60 per cent of urban growth in the 1960s with internal migration and reclassification accounting for the other 40 per cent. During the 1970s there was a slight tendency for the contribution of internal migration and reclassification to increase, particularly because of its higher weight in Asia. Yet, at the level of the developing world as a whole, internal migration and reclassification accounted for about 44 per cent of urban growth. A major new finding is that by the 1980s, as fertility declines had become more evident in many countries and rural out-migration rates declined in Africa, internal migration and reclassification accounted for more than half of the urban growth (54 per cent) occurring in the developing world as a whole, but its contribution varied considerably from one region to another. Thus in the 1980s, whereas internal migration and reclassification accounted for only 25 per cent of urban growth in Africa and 34 per cent in Latin America, it was the source of 64 per cent of urban growth in developing Asia. China influenced these estimates very markedly.
Without China, internal migration and reclassification accounted for about half of urban growth in other countries of Asia and, at the level of the developing world, were again responsible for 40 per cent of urban growth. However, in contrast with the 1960s, regional differences in the contribution of internal 
These findings have important implications for planners and policy makers.
As the study carried out two decades ago 24 suggested, population growth in urban areas is highly determined by natural increase. These data further indicate that, especially in regions characterized by economic stagnation, the role played by natural increase has been strengthened. Consequently, if the population growth of urban areas is to be reduced significantly, more emphasis has to be placed on the reduction of fertility.
This conclusion runs counter to the frequent assumption that the control of urban growth hinges on the reduction of rural-urban migration. In fact, the estimates presented show that rural out-migration rates in both Mrica and Asia have been on the low side. In addition, as other authors have reported, 25 there has been a positive and significant association between the estimated rural out-migration rates and levels of gross domestic product (GDP) in developing countries during the three decades considered. Such an association suggests that higher rural out-migration and the reclassification of rural into urban areas that 'this migration sometimes masks are both related to higher levels of prosperity.
If, as recognized in the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development,26 "the process of urbanization is an intrinsic dimension of economic and social development" (para. 9.1), its management, and not its retardation, should be the issue. As a new century approaches, the best information available suggests that the urban way of life will dominate the future. Much remains to be done, however, the better to document the processes underlying the urban transformation, especially those related to changes in productive systems and economic organization. The inertial forces characterizing demographic processes may allow us to produce serviceable forecasts from simple models, but the processes themselves are more complex and need to be better understood for policy-related purposes.
One of the major tasks that developing countries face today is to ensure reliable and affordable supplies of electric power for growing populations. Ready access to electricity for all households has come to represent a measure of economic and social progress and, to a degree, adequate power supplies are a requirement for that progress.
Providing electricity to new communities and reducing interruptions in supply to existing users are traditional demands made of political figures. Indeed, there has been considerable dissatisfaction with the way that the electricity sector has been run in a large number of countries and with how investments have been planned.
The power sector is highly capital intensive, and substantial investment will be required to meet the rapidly rising demand for power.
But this is not all. As Governments seek increased electric power, policy is increasingly turning to innovative investment schemes, more rational electricity pricing and more efficient supply and demand management. These issues are interrelated and, as time passes, it is becoming more and more critical to address them directly.

Consumption of electricity in developing countries has doubled twice over the past two decades, requiring the construction of close to 100 medium-sized power stations each year. In many cases, however, large investments have not generated the quality of services expected. On average, 40 per cent of the power-generating capacity in developing countries is not available for production.
1 Frequent power cuts have resulted in substantial losses of industrial output in a large number of countries. Moreover, until a few years ago, environmental concerns were not a highly salient issue in power plant construction.
Today, environmental concerns are very much in the public mind as regards both atmospheric pollution and the consequences of large hydroelectricity projects, such as the displacement of communities.
Together, these factors have led in two directions. One is a continuing demand for high levels of investment in the power sector. The other is a reassessment of the role of the State in the power sector in many countries and a movement away from direct government provision of electricity. It is part and parcel of a broader movement towards more indirect oversight of public utilities, which are increasingly becoming more autonomous and often privatized entities, albeit regulated ones.
Despite the rapid growth of electric power consumption in the developing countries over the past few decades, the level of consumption is still quite low.
It has yet to reach 2 billion people, living mainly in rural areas. Overall, electricity consumption per capita in the developing world is about one twelfth of what it is in the developed economies. It is highest in Latin America, among major developing economy regions, but even there it is only 17 per cent of the developed country average (see figure X.l). Per capita annual consumption of electricity in Africa is only one third of that in Latin America.
Electricity consumption depends on a combination of factors, chief among which are per capita income, the degree of urbanization and the extent of electrification (i.e., the percentage of households linked to an electrical grid). Latin America has the highest level of electrification, nearly 80 per cent of households having access to electricity. On the other hand, in Africa, only about 25 per cent of the population has access to electricity, and in some countries of sub-Saharan Mrica, electrical power is available to only 5 per cent of all households.
The highest per capita consumption is to be found among the oil exporting countries of the Middle East and the newly industrialized economies of South-East Asia, reflecting their higher income and degree of urbanization (see table X.l). These factors are also reflected in the per capita consumption of other higher income countries, such as Argentina, Chile, Brazil, Malaysia, the Republic of Korea, South Africa and Thailand. By contrast, the current extremely low per capita consumption in the least developed countries (80 kilowatt hours a year) indicates the need and potential for substantial growth in electricity consumption in those countries.
Electricity has been the fastest growing form of energy end-use over the past few decades. While total commercial energy consumption in developing countries has grown by 5 per cent a year since 1973, electricity consumption has grown by 7 per cent annually.
In comparison, the demand for electricity in the developed countries, during the same period, rose by less than 3 per cent a year, albeit from a much higher base. Without the dampening effect of chronic shortages, developing country consumption could have increased even more rapidly.
The strength of the demand for increased electricity supplies may be seen in terms of implicit income elasticities. The rate of growth of demand for energy has generally been close to the rate of growth of GDP in the developing countries (i.e., the income elasticity of demand was 1). But the rate of growth of power usage has been close to 50 per cent faster than the rate of growth of GDP (elasticity of 1.5).
Figure X.2 illustrates the buoyancy in the demand for electricity in a differ- .
ent manner. Following very strong growth in the 1960s and early 1970s, the growth of total energy consumption decelerated and demand has since expanded at almost the same rate as GDP. This reflected energy conservation and efficiency improvements that followed the sharp rise of energy prices in 19731974 and 1979-1980. However, electricity consumption grew throughout this period at rates higher than those of GDP and commercial energy consumption.
This was the case both in times of strong economic growth and in times of little or no growth, owing to the mechanization of industrial and agricultural production and the growth of electricity connection grids to households and service establishments.
Even so, electricity consumption in developing countries grew faster in the 1970s than it did in the 1980s and early 1990s. The rapid expansion of electricityin the 1970s took place while oil prices quadrupled in real terms. During that period, one might have expected the sharp rise in prices to substantially suppress consumption growth, particularly since electricity generation in most developing countries was heavily based on oil. While it is almost impossible to know with any degree of certainty how fast the growth in electricity use in developing countries would have been in the absence of the oil price changes of the 1970s, it appears that those shocks had little impact on the growth of electricity consumption. The most obvious explanation for that behaviour is that the increase in electricity costs due to the rises in oil prices were not quickly passed through to consumers but instead were absorbed by local power utilities through greater subsidies.
The aggregate relationship, in any case, is not the full story. Table X.2 presents information about the growth of both electricity use and national income for 18 developing countries (collectively they account for over four fifths of all developing country electricity use). Two generalizations were expected to apply to these data. One was that income elasticities of electricity demand would tend to be lower in countries with higher levels of economic development, as has generally been observed. While this hypothesis applies to the majority of countries in the table, it does not apply to them all. In particular, Argentina, Saudi Arabia, South Africa and Venezuela, in spite of having attained a relatively high level of GDP per capita, have continued to demonstrate large increases in electricity demand.
The second general relationship expected was that the income elasticity of electricity demand would vary positively with the rate ofeconomic growth. In some cases, however, electricity demand continued to grow during periods of little or no economic growth (e.g., the Philippines in 1983-1985, and Saudi Arabia and the Islamic Republic of Iran in most of the 1980s). This indicates that in some countries, there are factors other than income that stimulate the growth in electricity demand. The main reasons for this disparity are price subsidies and government policies that facilitate access to and use of electricity.
Whenever possible, Governments of developing countries have promoted the use of electricity, both as a contributor to economic development and as a way to raise living standards. Similarly, some Governments have attempted to substitute readily available hydroelectricity for other forms of energy. For example, following the construction of the large Itaipu Dam, the Government of Brazil encouraged industrial customers to substitute hydropower (for which there was excess capacity) for imported fuel oil.2 It is evident, therefore, that government promotion and subsidized pricing complemented rising income in contributing to the rapid rise of electricity use in developing countries over the past few decades.
The power stations that have been built in the developing world have relied primarily on relatively standardized technologies for electricity production.
Figure X.3 shows the net installed capacity of electricity generating plants by type in 1993. About 67 per cent of capacity was thermal (i.e., using oil, gas or coal), 30.5 per cent hydropower, 2 per cent nuclear and 0.3 per cent geothermal. Other forms of new and renewable sources of energy, such as solar, wind and biomass are also being used to generate electricity in the developing world, but their contribution to overall electricity production remains negligible in spite of their potential use, particularly in rural areas.
The domestic availability of energy resources and the size as well as the location of the market weigh heavily in the choice of generating plants. For example, the availability of large-scale coal reserves have made coal-fired power plants particularly important in the power generation programmes of the electric utilities in China, India, Indonesia, South Africa and Turkey. In addition, because of its competitive price, a number of newly industrialized economies in South-East Asia rely heavily on imported coal for the generation of electricity. Coal at present thus accounts for about 45 per cent of power generation in developing countries, up from its level in the early 1970s.
In spite of its market competitiveness, however, coal use is expected to be limited in some countries because of concerns over environmental consequences, competition from natural gas, and financing difficulties in building new coal-fired capacity.
Because of the high carbon and sulphur content of coal, its use has been the subject of global discussions on measures intended to reduce acid rain and mitigate the effects of global warming. Although fiscal mechanisms, such as carbon taxes have yet to be implemented in most countries, their proposals have led some power utilities in developed countries to move away from coal in favour of natural gas~ In developing countries, however, coal use will still grow very considerably, despite the environmental concerns, because of coal's availability and low cost.
The contribution of natural gas to the total power generation of developing countries currently stands at 7 per cent. However, natural gas use is set to grow very considerably owing to its environmental advantages over other fuels and relatively lower cost. Natural gas prices have fallen in real terms since the early 1980s, in parallel with the fall in oil prices. The growing importance of natural gas can also be attributed to the higher efficiency of combined cycle technology. In a combined cycle system, waste heat is recovered from a gas turbine to fuel a steam turbine, thereby reducing the heat content of a fuel that otherwise would have been lost in conventional, single cycle thermal power plants. The conversion efficiencies (the percentage of energy contained in the fuel that is converted into electricity) of combined cycle gas systems can reach 45 per cent, compared with about 30 per cent in conventional naturalgas fired power plants. Such combined cycle plants are not only more efficient in the conversion of energy than the conventional oil-, gas- and coal-fired power plants, but they produce electricity at a much lower cost. 4 In addition, gas-fired power plants emit 20 to 50 per cent less carbon into the atmosphere than either oil- or coal-fired plants.
At present, oil accounts for only II per cent of electricity generation in the developing world, considerably down from its share in the early 1970s. Dependence on oil for the generation of power declined during the 1980s, particularly in the larger developing countries. However, a considerable number of smaller developing economies continue to rely exclusively on oil for their electric power generation.
The development of hydropower in the developing countries has increased rapidly over the past two decades, accounting for 31 per cent of their electricity supply in 1993 (the developing countries also accounted for one third of the world's hydropower). However, only a small part of the hydropower potential has been exploited so far, owing in part to a lack of large markets near some potential hydropower sites, as well as to environmental concerns. Nuclear power's overall contribution is small but significant in some countries or areas (e.g., Argentina, China, India, the Republic of Korea, South Africa and Taiwan Province of China).
In the medium term, traditional sources of energy for generating electric power will dominate capacity expansion. Cleaner burning coal technologies will be used more progressively, in the light of such international treaties, as the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, among other things.
Natural gas use for power generation will continue to expand in easily accessible markets, but the high costs associated with tapping and transporting large supplies of natural gas to remote areas may curtail the growth of the use of this clean-burning fuel. Oil will remain the primary fuel for incremental electricity capacity in the oil-exporting countries and in relatively small markets. Based on the resource potential, hydropower may contribute significantly to the supply of electricity in Africa and Asia.
In the longer run, more advanced power generation technologies will be able to produce electricity at lower costs and with a less adverse environmental impact. The most promising of these technologies -some of which are still in various stages of development and demonstration in Europe, Japan and the United States of America -include gas turbine/steam turbine combined cycles, atmospheric and pressurized fluid-bed combustion and integrated coal-gasification combined cycle power plants.
Power suppliers will also need to draw increasingly upon advances in technology that increase the technically feasible and economically competitive range of new and renewable sources of energy. Research and development in renewable energy over the past two decades have ah'eady led to substantial reductions in the costs of producing electricity from solar, wind and biomass energy, although they are generally still not competitive with traditional electricity production techniques. A large potential remains for fmther advances and cost reductions. At the present time, however, such energy sources can be used efficiently to supply electricity in rural areas, where costs of extending national electricity grids can be prohibitive. One of the most efficient ways to use renewable energy in rural areas is through decentralized electrification, which has been successful in several countries through private sector, cooperative, govermnent and donor-supported initiatives.
There is yet another source of increased electric power supplies that is already available and has become increasingly noted in recent years, namely cutting losses and improving the efficiency of existing plant capacities. On the basis of estimates of future investment requirements in the power sector of developing countries (see box X.I), a 5 per cent reduction in losses in the power sector of developing countries would reduce the need to expand capacity by nearly 4,000 megawatts a year and save over $6 billion annually. More savings could also be achieved through the use of more energy-efficient technologies in a number of energy end-use areas, such as lighting, heating and air conditioning.

As development proceeds, the demand for electricity in developing countries will continue to rise rapidly. Improvements in energy efficiency and technological advances may cushion the growth in power needs, but this effect would be offset by growth in incomes and demographic factors. The single largest market for poWer generation is China, where growth in electricity consumption has averaged 8 per cent a year since 1980. Under one scenario, where GNP will grow on average by 8.5 per cent for the rest of the decade and then rise by 6.5 per cent a year between 2001 and 2010, the Chinese Government foresaw the need to raise power generation capacity by 15 gigawatts a year from 1995 to 1997 and by 20 gigawatts ayear from 1998 to 2000." Such an annual expansion, which would necessitate capital investment in the order of $20 billion a year, is equivalent to the total installed power capacity in such countries as Finland, the Netherlands or Switzerland. Even if this strong growth is sustained until 2010, China's per capita consumption would still be. less than one fifth of that of the United States today. Other long-term forecasts estimate that electricity generation will need to grow by 6 per cent per year between 1990 and 2020 in order to sustain average annual GOP growth of 8per cent."
According to a World Bank study of the electric power expansion programmes in 70 developing and transition economies, including the eastern and central European countries of Hungary, Poland, Romania and the former Yugoslavia, demand for electricity in developing countries will grow at an average annual rate of 6.6 per cent between 1989 and 1999."
This would necessitate a power capacity expansion of 384 gigawatts, raising total capacity to 855 gigawatts in 1999 at a cumulative cost of $745 billion in 1989 dollars (almost $1 trillion in current dollars).
The World Energy Council expects investments in the power sector in developing countries to range between $2.4 and $4.4 trillion in 1990 dollars during the period 1990-202o.d This would account for between 64 and 79 per cent of all energy investments in developing countries over the same period.
At a conservative rate of 6 per cent ayear, it is estimated that developing countries will require an additional 1,170 gigawatts of installed capacity during the period 1994-2010." At an average overall system cost of around $1.6 billion per Gigawatt! total investment will be in the order of $1.87 trillion, for an average of about $117 billion ayear. At the same time, substantial investment will be needed to rehabilitate and replace older power plants reaching the limits of their operating lifetime. In addition, investment will also be needed to improve efficiency and reduce the impact of fossil fuel consumption on the environment.
In any country, the electric power consumed by households, enterprises and Governments is typically taken almost completely from large-scale distribution networks that serve a region of some size or the whole country. The economies of scale in transportation and production of electrical energy are such that a single power plant can supply a substantial market. Indeed, electricity is a "tradable good" (actually, a service) that countries frequently supply across borders. In the light of the technical characteristics of the production and distribution of electricity, not to mention the importance of electric power as part of the essential infrastructure of an economy, Governments have frequently taken direct responsibility for the electric power sector, especially in developing countries.
As recently as a few years ago, the power sector in almost all developing countries was a state-owned and state-operated monopoly that was vertically integrated from electricity production to medium- and high-voltage electricity transmission, to conversion to low-voltage electricity for distribution to households. This is now changing, mainly because of dissatisfaction with the operation of government-run utilities. While the critical importance and the special character of the power sector give Governments an essential role in the oversight of the provision of its services, excessive intervention and subsidies have in many cases severely compromised the effectiveness of public power utilities.
Blackouts and brownouts are common experiences in most developing countries.7 The value of industrial output lost owing to such disruptions of power supply can be very high. In India, output lost owing to such disruptions of power supply can be very high. In India, for example, the loss of income due to power cuts and power shortages has been estimated to be equivalent to between 1 per cent and 3.5 per cent of annual GDP.s Frequent power cuts and voltage fluctuations also cause damage to electrical equipment. Often households as well as enterprises and governmental customers need to invest in voltage stabilizers and back-up generators to protect their electrical equipment.
In addition, developing country electric utilities have been subject to persistent, large transmission and distribution losses. While estimates of such losses vary, they all point to levels that are judged to be unacceptably high, ranging from about 15 to 25 per cent of net power generation. As shown in table X.3, such losses can exceed 20 per cent of total power generation, as in India and Pakistan, or over 15 per cent, as in Indonesia and the Philippines.
By contrast, in New Zealand and Norway, less than 6 per cent of electricity generated is lost in transmission and distribution. The losses in developing countries are equivalent to about 75 gigawatts of capacity, or 300 billion kilowatt hours a year, representing a value of some $30 billion a year.
Inadequate maintenance of power facilities has been another very costly and common practice in developing countries. Owing to inadequate maintenance and rehabilitation, it is estimated that in many of the least developed countries, electricity is being generated at a capacity utilization rate of only 25 per cent and in the developing countries as a whole at about 40 to 50 per cent.
By comparison, utilization rates for the developed economies are about 80 per cent. Furthermore, it has been estimated that older power plants consume between 18 and 44 per cent more fuel per kilowatt hour than do power plants in systems operating at best-practice levels.
It would often be cheaper to repair and rehabilitate ageing power stations than to construct new ones, but that rarely happens. Rehabilitation and upgrading can prolong the operational life of ageing power plants by 15 to 20 years and increase efficiency by up to 20 per cent. Inadequate maintenance shortens the operational life of power plants and reduces their effective capacity.
Rehabilitation and maintenance of power plants would not only increase efficiency, but would also be cost effective ways of raising the effective installed capacity, reducing the need for new investment and cutting air pollution.
Another dimension of inefficiency in the power sector is labour productivity.
Table X.3 shows labour productivity expressed as the output or sales per utility employee. The difference between government operated and other utilities has been dramatic. A power utility employee in Norway or Chile could be more than 20 times more productive than one in India or Pakistan. The main reason for the difference is staffing practices. For example, the state electric utilities of Botswana, Burundi, Mozambique, Papua New Guinea, Rwanda, Zambia and Zaire have fewer than 25 customers per employee. In Pakistan, state-owned utilities have on average 38 customers per employee. The Republic of Korea, however, has 292 customers per employee, the United States of America has 240, France has 222 and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Island has 153.12 The point at issue, of course, is not whether the utility operates in a developed or a developing country, or even whether it is a private or state enterprise, but whether management has the incentive to raise productivity and curb costs. Privatization can be one mechanism for strengthening this incentive. A case in point: since being privatized, the power utility of the United Kingdom has cut its staff by 8,000 people, or 47 per cent.
The above suggests that when the State owns a utility, performance often becomes a matter more of policy than of commercial necessity. However, when state-owned utilities are run along commercial lines, as in Australia, New Zealand, France or the Republic of Korea, their operational efficiency can be as high as that in the private sector. Moreover, the reason for state ownership has usually been that Governments could directly guide their own enterprise in a socially desirable direction, whereas large, private monopolies would operate differently. But government guidance can also be given indirectly, through regulation of a private utility. The experience of regulated monopolies, however, has been quite mixed.
Rather, it appears that introducing competition in the provision of public services can be a more effective force for operational efficiency than ownership or traditional regulation. Regulated firms have even operated as governmentprotected monopolies. Studies of the performance of nearly monopolistic power distribution firms in England, Wales and Chile concluded that while privatization led to large gains in power generation, there was little or no increase in the productivity of the distribution companies after privatization relative to that prior to privatization. 14 The final customers still faced a single provider of electricity services.
In any event, reform of the power sector has clearly entered the agenda of policy planners in both developed and developing countries. Reforms range from corporatizing and commercializing the public utility without altering its ownership, to full or partial privatization. To date, only a small number of countries have fully implemented their reform programme and others are still in various stages of implementation (see table X.4).
Among developing countries, only Argentina and Chile have largely completed their power sector reform programme, while Bolivia, Costa Rica, Colombia, Ghana, Malaysia and Thailand are well advanced in their reforms. Other countries that have made modest beginnings on their way towards power sector reform include China, India, Indonesia, Jordan, Lebanon, Mexico, Pakistan, the Philippines and Tunisia. Other countries, such as Cote d'Ivoire and Guinea-Bissau have improved the performance of their national electric utilities through the adoption of the French approach based on a system of management contracts. For example, the introduction of a small management team under an expatriate management contract has improved efficiency and increased revenues of Guinea Bissau's national electric utility!5 A number of other countries have barely begun to create a clear framework for power sector reforms despite a declared enthusiasm for the idea.
The reality is that the simplicity and attractiveness of "privatization" as a political slogan has to confront the complexity of an appropriate transfer of ownership from the State to the private sector. While there are benefits and opportunities that result from privatization, there are also a number of significant challenges!6 Considerations, such as restructuring of the company, downsizing of the labour force, development of regulatory oversight capacity and social challenges, can be formidable. In cases where full privatization is not feasible, Governments have used a number of other options, including partial privatization, commercialization, corporatization or demonopolization to reduce state control and improve efficiency!7 Moreover, there are a number of areas in which the private sector can participate even if the utility itself remains a state enterprise, ranging from collection, billing and maintenance to power generation, transmission and distribution.
The general thrust of the reforms in the power sector has been to increase the autonomy of the managers of electric power utilities and create incentives and disincentives that encourage decisions in the socially and economically desired directions. Policy on the pricing of electricity is a major case in point.

Throughout the developing world, electricity prices have lagged behind the costs of supply. The utilities, in other words, have depended heavily on governmental subsidies. A World Bank survey of power utilities in 60 countries found that price levels for nearly 80 per cent of the utilities did not cover the longrun average incremental cost of supply!8 However, in recent years, electricity prices in some countries have begun to reflect supply costs in response to commercialization and privatization of the power sector.
The classic problem with the subsidization of electricity, or in the subsidization of any good or service, is that it encourages excessive consumption and thus artificially raises capacity needs. Subsidies provide a significant disincentive for energy efficiency in the industrial and commercial sectors, where typically 70 to 80 per cent of the total power supply is consumed. Usually, energy subsidies are advocated as a benefit for the poor. In practice, little of the subsidized electricity reaches lower-income households, as only a small segment of them have access to electricity, particularly in Africa. Because the poorest people' often live in rural areas, they usually have to depend on more expensive and lower quality forms of energy.

But artificially low prices of electricity also deprive electric utilities of revenue and thus a measure of autonomy. Not only does this encourage the dependence of the utility on the Government, but it limits the ability of the utility to mobilize finance under its own name for capacity expansion. Indeed, according to the World Bank, the annual subsidies of electricity consumption are estimated at about $100 billion, which is roughly equivalent to annual investment requirements.
The economic principles underlying more appropriate pricing of electricity are not that difficult to elucidate. First, Governments should give aid to the poor in a manner that least distorts prices and efficient resource allocation (optimally, through direct wealth transfers, such as rights to land for tenant farmers). Second, the price of electricity should reflect the "real" cost, that is the opportunity cost, of its provision. Third, if an electric utility were privatized and left to itself, it would not charge the appropriate price. It would charge a higher one that reflected its monopoly power, and therefore the price needs to be regulated and/or new sources of supply need to be fostered so that the market can be contested.
The difficulty in the power field is in putting principles into practice. Industrialized economies with regulated private power utilities support large cadres of lawyers and industry specialists that advocate with the authorities for one price or another. Utility regulation is itself a specialization in the field of economics.
But the good need not be the prisoner of the best in this field as in any other in applied economics. There is a set of customary practices and there is learning by doing. The regular exchange of experiences among utility regulators and specialists would deepen the common understanding of what works best in reality.

The evolving enterprise and market structure of the electric utility sector in developing countries is changing the way investment decisions are made in the sector. Investment decisions in public utilities have traditionally been identified through least-cost planning models. These models entail a number of steps that start with a forecast of electricity demand, followed by the identification of an investment plan that would enable power utilities to meet the forecast demand. Once the investment plan is identified, a number of scenarios are considered in order to minimize system operating costs, subject to supplying the projected load at some given standard of supply. These operating costs are then added to the capital costs (calculated separately) to estimate the overall costs of the plan. The final step involves soliciting bids to implement the agreed upon plan.
Now, however, as private power investments are increasing, least cost planning models are becoming less useful in identifying the best investment decisions.
20 The method that actually minimizes cost may now involve government policy makers in considering multiple proposals from potential private producers at an earlier stage of the planning process. Also, as an increasing number of plants would be feeding electricity into a national grid in a growing economy, there would be opportunities for introducing competition by considering the market based proposals of new firms.
The point is that the availability of competing private producers adds a new dimension to the planning process. These producers are also willing to absorb technical and financial risks rather than transfer them to the host Government.
Unlike least-cost planning models used by public utilities, where the leastcostly programme is identified following an estimation of capacity and electricity requirements, in the private sector both capacity requirements and the choice of the plant are determined through competitive bidding.
The most important private power investment options available to developing countries are the build-own-operate-transfer (BOOT) and the build-ownoperate (BOO) schemes. Under a BOOT arrangement, a private project company, or a joint venture with a minority equity participation of the host Government, is set up to raise funds and plan, design and construct the power plant.
The company then runs the facility for a period of time, which is intended to be long enough to payoff the debt and make an acceptable return on the investment.
At the end of this franchise period, normally 20 to 25 years, the operating company transfers ownership of the project to the host country. Under a BOO scheme, the private company or the consortium retains ownership.
Among the potential benefits to be gained from either scheme is the expertise and the advanced technology that independent power producers usually bring with them. In addition, the private investors bring financial capital to the project.
However, because the legal, institutional and financial arrangements are usually complex to negotiate, the number of projects that have been successfully launched is limited.
The factors that policy makers must take into account in electricity planning are more complicated than they might once have been, not least because of the increasing appreciation of the damage that earlier investments had done to the environment. While the decision-making process varies from one country to another, in most cases it involves a large number of actors, multiple criteria, policy instruments and impediments (see figure X.4). When the process works harmoniously, the participation of the actors involved in the decision Governments, power utilities, international financial institutions, commercial banks, public interest groups -ensures that economic efficiency, adequate supply, social welfare and protection of the environment are given appropriate consideration. However, in the absence of a common understanding between the various actors and in the presence of conflicting views on the decision criteria, decision-making can be delayed and lead to power shortages.

The implication of the preceding discussion is that Governments need to address on the level of broad political understandings and the overall development framework the interrelationship between electricity supply and demand and the economic, environmental and social dimensions of development policies.:!!
The result would be a broad sector policy that might serve to harmonize or at least sort out the priorities embodied in the multiple criteria shown in figure X.4. Not only would this speed up the decision-making process on electric power expansion, but it would clarify the national position for the potential actors.
This is part and parcel of a now widely recognized need for clarity and transparency in public policy. Governments have a critical role to play in establishing a proper legal and regulatory framework that would set out clear roles for government, power utility and consumers, redefining sector governance.
The regulatory tasks should be performed by an independent regulatory authority that would hold the power sector accountable for performance.
Here, contemporary thinking emphasizes "incentive regulation"22 measures that provide the sector with incentives and scope for efficient performance, transparency and openness, and clear articulation of reform objectives, including pricing, without compromising the public interest. Such regulatory approaches must also include mechanisms to ensure full compliance with the rules, clearly set out in advance. The issue is confidence about policy not being changed and methods to reduce the perceived risk to investors.
The purpose of regulation must not be lost sight of. While proper power sector reforms and regulation are needed to improve performance, hastily applied institutional changes, driven by a bias towards privatization, can be costly. The public has a legitimate concern in the area of electricity supply, ensuring for example that private monopolies are not simply substituted for public utilities.
But a clearer role for the Government as policy maker, rather than producer, will avoid the confusion of roles that seems to have been the cause of much of the inefficiency in most publicly owned power utilities.
Power utilities should be provided with both incentives and autonomy to choose among various ways to achieve performance goals. Regardless of whether the ownership is public or private, the Government should be responsible for regulation and policies, while power utilities should be responsible for investment planning, construction and operation of power facilities. Indeed, ownership of power plants, the electric grid and distribution networks can be unbundled and can be public or private, albeit with governmental regulation and oversight.
The planet may be largely covered with water, but over 1 billion people were estimated to be without safe drinking water in 1994 and ahnost 3 billion (roughly half the world population) were without adequate sanitation in developing countries (see table XI.l). Not surprisingly, ahnost half of the world population (over 2.5 billion people) still suffered from diseases associated with insufficient or contaminated water at the beginning of the 1990s.1 Furthermore, water-borne diseases contribute to the death of at least 4 million children in developing countries every year.2 As will be discussed further below, part of the problem is that freshwater is a product not only actually scarce in several regions, but also relatively costly to transport over long distances. In any case, water resources development frequently requires large investments and long time-horizons - not to mention high sunl~ costs of installing or expanding distribution networks - which cannot always be easily afforded by poorer countries with scarce financial resources. In addition, high rates of population growth will continue to put severe pressure on the ability of many developing countries to provide water supply and sanitation to their unserved population.
By the end of the century, there may be fewer people without potable water, but many more will be without sanitation, among the reasons for which is that sanitation costs more to introduce than safe water and is perceived as less vital for survival than freshwater-supplies themselves. In addition, the cost of supplying water to those who already receive it willlilmly rise appreciably in many parts of the world. The imbalance between the growing demand for water and an increasingly scarce (and polluted) supply along with the rising cost of expanding and modernizing water networks is making inefficient management of water resources extremely costly. The present chapter thus focuses on key dimensions of inefficient water resource management and concludes with a brief analysis of two new economic approaches to water resources management: efficient water pricing and market-based mechanisms for water transfers.

Concern about clean water has been in the global agenda for at least two decades (the United Nations Water Conference took place in Mar del Plata, Argentina, in 1977). The General Assembly sought to focus attention on the issue, inter alia, through proclaiming the period 1981-1990 as the International Drinking Water Supply and Sanitation Decade. Broadly speaking, the main goal of the Decade was to promote a substantial improvement in the standards and levels of services in drinking water supply and sanitation, particularly in developing countries (see Assembly resolution 35/18 of 10 November 1980). Improvements in both types of services are closely intertwined because the lack of sanitation precludes the proper treatment of human waste which is, in tum, one of the main sources of unsafe water.
The International Drinking Water Supply and Sanitation Decade witnessed a significant expansion in the provision of potable water supply and sanitation, even though progress towards the ultimate goal of universal coverage in both services was hampered by unexpected and difficult economic developments in many developing countries, including external debt problems, macroeconomic adjustment requirements, disappointing economic growth and attendant constraints on public expenditure.
Full coverage will still be far from attained in many areas during the present decade. According to available data, which are of uneven reliability, the share of population with access to safe water in developing countries rose from 60 to 74 per cent during the first half of the 1990s and it is forecast that that share will have increased even further by the end of the decade (see figure XL1).4The situation with regard to sanitation, however, is deteriorating. Although an additional 100 million people will be provided with adequate sanitation during the 1990s, total coverage is expected to drop from 34 per cent of the population in the developing world in 1990 to 30 per cent in 2000, as the number of unserved people will also increase by over 600 million during the same period.
To make matters worse, even with impressive rates of progress in water-supply coverage during the first half of the 1990s, the number of people without access to safe water in urban areas increased, owing to the significant rates of population growth in urban areas (see chap. IX). It is expected, however, that the situation will have worsened significantly in several respects by the end of the century. The number of urban-dwellers without access to safe water may increase by almost 60 per cent, from 244 million in 1990 to an estimated 384 million in 2000; and while the share of rural residents with access to safe water is expected to rise considerably during the 1990s, coverage in urban areas will drop to levels below those in 1990 (see figure XI.2). Sanitation coverage is meanwhile forecast to fall in both urban and rural areas. The number of urban-dwellers without access to adequate sanitation may almost double during this decade (see, also, table XU).
From a regional perspective, the urban water-supply crisis is likely to be worst in Mrica, where percentage coverage will fall most markedly and where the number of unserved people will almost double between 1990 and 2000 (see figure XI.3). During the same period, the number of unserved urban residents will also increase by at least 80 per cent in Latin America and the Caribbean, and by 40 per cent in the Asia and Pacific region.
Securing a reliable supply of freshwater that is adequate in quality and quantity for all people is thus a fundamental challenge facing the world. It is being increasingly recognized, moreover, that the achievement of this goal may be undermined by a disruption in the water-supply of those who already enjoy access. As affirmed in the Dublin Statement on Water and Sustainable Development, one of the two main outputs of the 1992 International Conference on Water and the Environment: Development Issues for the Twenty-first Century:
"Scarcity and misuse of freshwater pose a serious and growing threat to sustainable development and protection of the environment. Human health and welfare, food security, industrial development and the ecosystems on which they depend, are all at risk, unless water and land resources are managed more effectively in the present decade and beyond than they have been in the past."
The water crisis, if it indeed emerges, will be the result of four major tendencies.
First of all, although freshwater is generally considered an abundant resource, its available supply is relatively scarce in many respects. While over two thirds of the Earth's surface is covered by 1.4 billion cubic kilometres of water, only 2.5 per cent of this volume is fresh, that is, suitable for drinking, irrigation and most industrial purposes (see figure XI.4). Moreover, no more than a third of this freshwater stock is available at less than extraordinary cost for human use in rivers, lakes and underground aquifers.6 Furthermore, as the principle of sustainable development signifies, the amount of water available for human use should be determined not by the total volume of freshwater on Earth but by the volume of renewable freshwater stocks. Whenever rates of withdrawal exceed natural rates of recharge, human water use can be considered unsustainable. Such depletion of freshwater resources - notably of groundwater - is becoming increasingly common throughout the world.
The world's average annual renewable water supply is estimated at approximately 42,000 cubic kilometres, a figure representing a mere 0.1 per cent of total freshwater resources. This includes both water currently being withdrawn and water withdrawable under known technology at less than extraordinary cost. As table XI.2 shows, the availability of renewable freshwater resources also varies considerably among regions. For example, per capita availability in Oceania is 10 times greater than in Europe, whereas it is 9 times larger in Latin America than in Asia. Water availability problems are thus primarily regional ones. Indeed, in the densely inhabited and water-scarce north-eastern region of Brazil, it is irrelevant for human activities that most of the renewable freshwater stock of the sparsely populated Amazon River basin (which accounts for no less than 16 per cent of the world's renewable freshwater resources) goes unexploited.7 The existence of the abundant water in the Ama zon is even less relevant for the more distant water-short regions, such as Sahelian Africa or the Middle East. Strictly speaking, then, one cannot refer to an emerging "global" water crisis, but rather to a number of regional crises arising from imbalances between the local availability of renewable freshwater and the human demand for it.
One means suggested for overcoming unsustainable withdrawals of water is to increase freshwater supply by desalinating the vast stock of sea water.
Although some desalination currently takes place, it is a highly capital- and energy-intensive activity and costs three to four times more than conventional freshwater withdrawals.s As a result of its high costs, desalination is used rarely and when it is used, it is often heavily subsidized by Governments.
Thus, its use has largely been restricted to countries with abundant financial and/or energy resources. Even though costs are beginning to come down, desalination is likely to remain a relatively limited answer to local water shortages.
In other words, it is highly unlikely that enough desalinating capacity would be created to make any significant contribution to ameliorating the building water-supply crisis.
Outside the realm of exotic and non-competitive sources of potable water, the costs of adding new water-supplies have been rising. Most cities naturally first developed easily available and cheaper water sources, and so the unit costs of new water projects tend to be higher than the cost of existing supplies.
In Amman (Jordan), for example, while the average incremental cost of the original water-supply network (based on groundwater pumping) had been $0.41 per cubic metre, this cost rose to $1.33 per cubic metre when physical shortages of groundwater led to the use of surface water.The costs of expanding or modernizing existing urban water-supply networks are also rising because of higher water quality standards resulting from health considerations or consumer pressure. Higher project costs will also contribute to increasing delays in implementing new water projects, even though those projects may be urgently required to satisfy rising demand.
The second major tendency that could lead to a water crisis is to be found on the demand side. It is evident that freshwater resources will be increasingly challenged by a significant growth in world population, from an estimated 5.7 billion in 1995 to over 8 billion in 2025 and almost 10 billion in 2050.11 Moreover, between 1995 and 2025, 96 per cent of global population growth is expected to take place in urban areas, mostly in developing countries (see chap. IX). As noted above, urban areas are also likely to suffer the most serious water-supply shortages in the years and decades to come.
The rapid growth of water use by industry and services adds to this problem.In several rapidly industrializing areas, manufacturing and commercial water use are expected to increase 10-fold between 1990 and 2025. This is not surprising, given that the share of industrial water use in total water withdrawals in industrialized countries is over six times the share in developing countries (see figure XI.5). As the latter industrialize, they are also likely to experience a considerable rise in industrial water use.
It is generally agreed, as a rough rule-of-thumb, that when a country's annual renewable freshwater resources fall to around 1,700 cubic metres per capita, it will begin to become "water-stressed", and that, when this rate drops below 1,000 cubic metres per capita, that country is likely to suffer "chronic water scarcity", that is, to have its water availability then considered a severe constraint on socio-economic development.Although these scarcity thresholds can obviously be affected by changes in the composition of production and consumption, efficiency of water use and climate patterns, they are commonly used as warning signals by many organizations of the United Nations system.l4 According to these thresholds, no less than 30 States Members of the United Nations are likely to experience chronic water scarcity by 2025 (see table XI.3).15 Overall, at least 50 countries are expected to be water-stressed by 2025, including many developing countries with large populations (China will be close to the water-stress threshold by 2025 and at it by 2050). As figure XI.6 illustrates, several highly populated developing countries that had abundant per capita water resources only a few decades ago are water-stressed or will be so within the next few decades. Moreover, because of uneven geographical distribution of surface water, groundwater and rainfall- together with the high cost of pumping water over long distances - several countries with abundant · water resources at the national level frequently experience severe water shortages in certain regions, such as, for example, north-eastern Brazil, northern Ethiopia and north-western India, not to mention the south-western United States of America.
The third factor that is all too often pushing towards water shortages is the increasing pollution of freshwater sources by untreated household sewage, industrial effluent, agricultural run-offs and inappropriate land-use patterns.
Indeed, major industrial water pollutant loads in 2025 might increase three to five times the 1990 level, depending on plausible alternative economic development and energy growth scenarios.
Water pollution is becoming a particularly costly problem in heavily populated urban areas in developing countries. Freshwater sources near many urban centres have become so severely contaminated that more distant sources have had to be developed at a considerable cost. In Shanghai, for example, water intakes had to be relocated more than 40 kilometres upstream at a cost of about $300 million.In addition, increasing water demand by rapidly growing cities has in many cases led to overpumping of underground aquifers at a rate well above their natural rate of recharge. This is not only unsustainable in the long run, but also contributory to land subsidence in parts of several large cities. In Mexico City, for instance, water is currently being pumped over an elevation of 1,000 metres through a 140-kilometre pipeline because increasing land subsidence and deteriorating water quality have restricted the use of the city's aquifer.
Last but not least, it is worrisome to note the degree of inefficient water resources management. The issue was highlighted in Agenda 21,19 which expressed concern about the "fragmentation of responsibilities for water resources development" (para. 18.6) and the lack of integrated water resources planning and management. In many countries, water resources are developed and managed more or less independently at different levels of jurisdiction (national, regional and local) and along the lines of separate sectors, such as agriculture, industry, hydropower generation, municipal water-supply, navigation, inland fisheries, recreation and so forth. Such fragmentation fails to take advantage of the multisectoral nature of water resources· development and often leads to inefficient use of scarce water resources. Furthermore, inefficient water management is often closely associated with widespread underpricing of water and thus with a certain disregard for its economic value. There is therefore a policy dimension to the inefficiency question that warrants discussion.

In many countries, political and social considerations have tended to overrule pricing policies that would promote more efficient water use. In addition, scarce public funds are allocated to develop new water sources - many of which are not financially or environmentally sound. In other words, water pricing subsidies and disregard for efficient demand management not only contribute to wasteful consumption, but also often lead to costly investments in otherwise unnecessary storage facilities and water distribution infrastructure.
Subsidization of publicly supplied water is a particularly serious problem in agriculture because agriculture tends to absorb the bulk of supply (see figure XI.5), often for low-efficiency and low-value uses. In the State of Arizona (in the south-western United States), for example, publicly supplied water is used to irrigate land producing wheat that yields values of about $33 per 1,000 cubic metres. In cities of the same State, the direct economic value of the same volume of water can be as high as $302.20 In neighbouring California, water prices for irrigated agriculture are so low that it is profitable to grow low-value crops (such as corn for silage) even in very arid areas.
Widespread underpricing of irrigation water can be questioned not only because it tends to encourage production of low-value crops and wasteful water use, but also because it absorbs scarce public investment resources. There is much evidence that irrigation projects have become one of the most heavily subsidized of economic activities. For instance, a study of 18 major public irrigation projects in the western United States showed that the estimated subsidy ranged from 57 to 97 per cent of the full cost of supply, with a median of 85 per cent.Another study estimated that average irrigation subsidies in six: Asian countries covered no less than 90 per cent of total operation and maintenance costs.Because of improper pricing of irrigation water, the percentage of capital and even operation and maintenance costs recovered from users is so low that very high levels of public subsidies are required to sustain irrigation facilities.
Inadequate cost recovery, in turn, tends to reduce public funds available for investments in new irrigation projects or improvements in current ones.
Given artificially low water prices, it is no surprise that the predominant method of irrigation in many parts of the world is the flood system - that is, the pumping of water from open ditches between rows of crops until it soaks into the soil. This method is not only the most water-intensive (compared with more efficient sprinkler systems or drip irrigation), but also vulnerable to the greatest waste of water by evaporation. It is estimated that, on average, as much as 55 per cent of the water used for irrigation is lost to evaporation and other inefficiencies (see figure XI. 7). Furthermore, without adequate drainage, the flood system often leads to decreasing yields because of waterlogging and salinization.At least a quarter of all irrigated land in developing countries is affected by salinization.
In addition, public water companies often provide subsidized water services to urban households, particularly in developing countries and countries with economies in transition. A recent review of public urban water-supply projects financed by the World Bank in these countries shows that water prices cover only about a third of the cost of supply.As in the agricultural sector, underpricing of urban water services is often accompanied by wasteful consumption patterns and, in many countries, occasional interruptions of supply or rationing. In addition, access to government subsidies by public water authorities also makes feasible low operating efficiency, be it in terms of low labour productivity, poor financial performance or disregard for unacceptably high levels of unaccounted-for water use resulting from the failure to repair leaks or limit illegal connections.
Furthermore, while such subsidies are often justified on the grounds that lower-income groups cannot afford to pay for water, there is evidence that it is usually wealthier and more influential groups that benefit disproportionately from government subsidies, since public water-supply networks in many developing countries tend to exclude services to the poorest urban-dwellers. Several studies show that, in many developing countries, subsidized urban water supply and sanitation are provided disproportionately to politically more influential middle- and higher-income groups which, in effect, pre-empt the inadequate supplies.Other studies also show that large numbers of urban poor depend on private water vendors and pay a much higher price than wealthier consumers served by public piped water. In Khartoum, for example, private water vendors have charged between 30 and 120 times the rate per cubic metre paid by residents with a piped supply.In low-income neighbourhoods of several Asian cities, water sold by private vendors costs between 20 and 100 times more than what middle-class residents pay for the same amount of piped water.In any case, more efficient water pricing can be accompanied by social policy to better target subsidies on the true low-income groups; in other words, a policy of economic pricing does not necessarily imply that the poor should pay the full cost of water.
In the presence of a growing scarcity of public funding, failure to charge more realistic prices for water has often been accompanied by insufficient investment in the modernization, expansion and even maintenance of water and sewerage infrastructure. Lack of adequate investment, in turn, has had adverse impacts on coverage of low-income groups, water-quality standards, human health and environmental balance. This vicious circle of heavy subsidization, inefficient operation, inadequate service expansion and insufficient investment cries out for re-examination by policy makers.

In response to the problems associated with inefficient patterns of water allocation among competing uses, Agenda 21, in its chapter 18, synthesized the consensus view on integrated approaches to the development, management and use of water resources. In addition, new, experimental economic approaches to scarce water resources management are emerging in various parts of the world. Among the innovative policies that countries have increasingly been introducing to promote a more efficient water resource allocation, two options deserve to be highlighted: (a) pricing policies aimed at improving water use efficiency or cost recovery and (b) market-based mechanisms for transferring water from low-value to higher-value uses.

Prices that reflect the economic value of water are particularly important because they encourage more efficient consumption and allocation of scarce water resources among different uses. It can be argued that efficient pricing of water should basically be determined in relation to its opportunity cost - that is, its value in the best alternative use. In other words, water should be available to a particular use only if its opportunity cost is lower than the value of that use. However, determining the opportunity cost of water requires detailed information about complex variables, such as the market value of future demand, pollution costs and investment alternatives, that are not always available, particularly in developing countries.3o In any case, political and social considerations seem to allow only a gradual move towards the adoption of a price for water that equals its opportunity cost, not least because of the extensive degree of underpricing, particularly in the agricultural sector.
As a result, there has been an increasing emphasis on pricing policies linked to the cost of water-supply, as a first step, away from heavy subsidization towards politically infeasible opportunity cost pricing. In fact, according to a recent United Nations inter-agency water sector policy review, there are only two effective pricing principles that are practical: one based on the cost of provision of water and the other on its market price.The motive of the first principle (the second will be discussed further below) is primarily to stress the importance of cost recovery by water companies in order to reduce pricing subsidies, operating inefficiency and inadequate investment. Thus, as discussed by Serageldin,32 several countries are now beginning to set water prices that cover the cost of services in order to ensure the financial autonomy of their water companies and the sustainability of their operations.
Charging prices that ensure the financial autonomy of water companies is relatively easier in urban areas because of their greater concentration of consumers that can be metered and their generally high concentration of highervalue uses. Given the potentially large economies of scale in urban areas and, in developing countries, the existence of inefficient and small-scale private vendors that charge high water prices anyway, there are many opportunities to expand and improve piped water services at water prices that recover at least the cost of operation and maintenance.
In fact, in some recent experiences of urban water privatization, water companies have also been able to recover the fixed capital costs of new infrastructural investments by increasing water prices. One example from the developed economies that emphasizes full-cost pricing by a public utility is the English and Welsh model of full privatization of water-supply through the sale of shares to the public. It has shown that, contrary to conventional policy, a whole water supply system (collection, purification, delivery and sewerage) can be owned and operated satisfactorily by private firms (provided, of course, that an effective regulatory machinery is in place to prevent excessive monopoly profits and to ensure that adequate infrastructural investments are carried out with reasonable profit returns).
However, the English and Welsh model of full privatization may not be suitable to most countries, particularly developing countries and economies in transition, because of their underdeveloped capital markets, restricted shareownership base and limited capacity to regulate, and because of political opposition to the possibility of transferring ownership of such an essential public service to foreign investors.
Consequently, most recent experiences of water privatization have been based on long-term leases or concessions, as pioneered in France, where private companies are currently responsible for approximately three-quarters of water-supply. A leasing contract generally involves transferring the management, operation and maintenance of a water-supply system from a public water authority to the private sector for a fixed period of time (usually 10-20 years). In Guinea, for example, less than two years after contracts to supply water to the main cities were awarded to private water companies, the fee collection rate had increased from 15 to 70 per cent and services had improved considerably.
Under a "concessionary contract" (that is, a contract that grants an operating concession), the private firm also becomes responsible for financing, building and operating new facilities to meet additional water demand over the concession period (usually 20-30 years), at the end of which all facilities are returned to the public water authority. An important feature of concessionary contracts is thus that increased water charges are also aimed at financing at least part of the capital (as well as operating) costS. 34 When private sector involvement is limited to the building and management of new water and sewerage facilities, the concession is often called a build-operate-transfer (BOT) contract.
Long-term concessions and BOT contracts have recently been awarded to private consortia, invariably led by French or British water companies, in places spread around the world, such as Buenos Aires, Mexico City, the Czech Republic, Malaysia, Ho Chi Minh City and several southern Chinese cities.
For example, at the end of 1994, a joint venture between a local government authority in southern China and a leading French water company began a 30year concession to run the water-supply system in the city of Tanzhou. It became the country's first water utility to be partly owned and managed by foreign private investors. This venture reflected how one local government authority had chosen to undertake costly improvements in water infrastructure that were necessary to support the city's rapid demographic and industrial growth.
Many more contracts of this type are in the pipeline in several developing, industrialized and transition countries that have never before experimented with urban water privatization.
In agriculture, where economically efficient pricing is often hindered by the difficulty of measuring the volume each farmer consumes, there has also been increasing interest in cost-recovery schemes. The degree of subsidization has been quite large, even in industrialized countries, as public irrigation pricing has generally been set to cover only a small part of operation and maintenance costS.35 Given the extent of subsidization and underpricing of irrigation services and the large size and long-term horizon of some infrastructural investments, the immediate objective of increased pricing in several countries has thus been to enhance the recovery of operating costs, leaving aside fixed (capital)
costs for the time being.
Pricing of irrigation services include (a) direct pricing based on volume of water consumed, (b) quasi-direct pricing based on duration of delivery, delivery turns (that is, rotating of their access by users) or area irrigated and (c)
indirect instruments, such as additional land taxes based on the value of agricultural output or taxes on fuel used by pumps.Agricultural water use, however, is rarely priced on a volumetric basis, usually because consumption cannot be easily measured (notably groundwater). In any case, volumetric pricing of irrigation services to a large number of small farmers is usually impractical, if not infeasible. For example, it would be very costly to measure individual water consumption in large irrigation projects in South Asia given that, in many cases, hundreds of thousands of farmers receive a variable quality of service in areas even larger than 1 million hectares. II
A new approach increasingly being used to deal with this problem entails measuring and pricing water delivered to an ad hoc rural water user association, which then becomes responsible for recovering costs from users through indirect charging methods. Besides improving cost recovery, this approach often contributes to improved coordination and cooperation between farmers and irrigation agencies, and thus to greater accountability of irrigation managers to water users. For example, evidence from the Republic of Korea shows that the establishment of such ad hoc associations has led to full user participation in water resources management. Such innovative cost-recovery schemes can clearly contribute to ensuring the financial autonomy of the water-supply agency and to reducing pricing subsidies. However, because they are not fully based on volumetric pricing, and because subsidies are not totally eliminated, these schemes may not do enough to ensure efficient water reallocation from lower- to higher-value uses.

Although water transfers within a sector are common in many parts of the world, transfers from low-value agricultural uses to high-value urban ones in order to increase aggregate economic benefit are still rare. In theory, this could be carried out in any of three ways, namely, through (a) administrative reallocation by national or provincial legislation ("command and control"), (b) raising water prices so that low-value users are encouraged to release extra amounts to higher-value ones ("opportunity cost pricing") and (c) trading among users in a free or regulated market.
The first approach, where water allocations are decided through administrative means, leaves allocation decisions to bureaucratic bodies that are never adequately informed about the relative costs and benefits faced by water users.
The reallocation of water tends to be an antagonistic and cumbersome process that generally responds to changes in cost and demand conditions only with long lags, if at all. Consequently, allocation decisions tend to be ambiguous and hinder economically efficient use of water. Given that opportunity cost pricing can be accomplished easily only in the context of well-defined property rights and actual market transactions as well as other factors, the second approach is not much different from the first.
The challenge is to replace the largely administrative approach to water allocation with one that recognizes the unitary nature of the resource and its economic value, and distinguishes between public responsibility for the resource and the users' responsibility to manage its use. That there are many theoretical aspects of market-based water allocation methods that are potentially attractive is indicated by but a few examples: Water transfers are truly voluntary and hence tend to defuse political conflict; they ensure the mobility of water entitlement from less efficient to economically more efficient uses of water; they provide improved incentives to adopt water-saving technology and practices; they are decentralized and increase users' involvement in water resource management; they reduce environmental problems through more efficient resource utilization; and, last but not the least, they encourage efficient investment behaviour in water users. Despite the apparent theoretical attractiveness of water markets, their practical implementation is difficult to achieve, since a wide range of factors - physical (geographical, climatic, infrastructural and so forth), legal and administrative, cultural and psychological, to name just the most important ones - limit water rights transfers by raising the transactions costs that market exchanges must overcome.
A "sticks-and-carrots" combination of all three mechanisms mentioned above is present in a 1992 federal law of the United States which, inter alia, reallocates water away from California's Central Valley Project, a huge network comprising dams and miles of canals that transport water from northern California to the centre of the State's farm industry in the central valley. First of all, the law reserves 800,000 acre-feet of water - roughly 10 per cent of the water the project delivers in a year of normal rainfall - to rivers, estuaries, reservoirs and wildlife reserves, primarily to restore fish and waterfowl habitats.
Second, it reduces federal subsidies and introduces a tiered pricing system designed to reduce wasteful consumption and encourage conservation. Third, the law allows farmers to sell excess water-supplies at market rates to urban water utilities.
This piece of legislation has emerged from the century-old battle over water rights in California between farmers, who use about 85 per cent of the State's water-supply, and household and industrial users, who have been facing severe water rationing, particularly during recent droughts. As a result, an intersectoral market in water is beginning to emerge. For example, in some transactions between the Imperial Valley irrigation system and the city of Los Angeles, farmers have agreed to adopt more economical irrigation methods or to improve existing irrigation infrastructure in order to free water for sale to the city.
In theory, one of the main economic advantages of such water markets is increased productive efficiency, as owners of water rights are encouraged to chose more efficient ways of using water in order to derive financial gain through the sale of the surplus.In addition, because water markets promote a more efficient use of existing supplies, they tend to reduce the amount of investment necessary to develop new supplies.
Although there is evidence to show that some of these efficiency improvements are occurring in parts of the western United States, there also exist restrictive state water trading laws that undermine the satisfactory operation of free water markets. 42 In fact, water rights transactions are usually conducted through private contracts (in other words, without public bidding), albeit with oversight by government agencies, which often fixes ranges within which water prices can move. In other words, certain basic conditions for the effective functioning of markets, such as large numbers of buyers and sellers and welldefined property rights, are missing from most United States water markets. As a result, although market-like exchanges of water rights have generated some localized efficiency gains, water-intensive agriculture using inefficient irrigation methods has, on the whole, largely continued.
A possibly better water market model for countries to consider is that of Chile. Chile is a relatively dry country that has long metered water use, albeit with subsidies for low-income households. It is thus not surprising that Chile was the first country to adopt a comprehensive water law that established a detailed system of tradable property rights. 43 Its 1981 Water Code defines water rights that confer ownership and are transferable and independent of land use or ownership.
Under the Water Code, water is a public good with the right to use granted to private parties. Water rights are considered private assets which, subject to the Civil Code, can be sold or mortgaged separately from land. The right to use water is an actual or real right that confers ownership. The owner is entitled to use water, obtain benefits from it, and dispose of it. After the initial granting of a right, the State does not interfere with the process of water allocation and the future distribution of rights among users is left to the markets.
Although the most frequent transaction in the water market occurs between neighbouring farmers, there are a considerable number of purchases of rights from farmers by urban water companies, particularly in order to supply water to new housing developments or new industry. In order to enter into such deals, farmers are encouraged to use irrigation water more efficiently so that they can sell a small portion of their rights. For example, a farmer who increases irrigation water use efficiency by 30 per cent on a 40-hectare grape plantation can sell shares in water rights equivalent to 24 litre/second (enough to irrigate about 12 hectares annually) for $7,000-$10,000. In fact, farmers often sell a portion of their water rights to higher-value agricultural users as well.
What have been the results of the market allocation of water so far? Market allocation of water, and particularly the existence of secure property rights, appear to have made a noticeable contribution to the overall growth in the value of Chile's agricultural production during the last 15 years. The effects of the water market cannot be fully separated, however, from the effects of other economic reforms, especially trade liberalization and establishing of secure land rights. 44 This notwithstanding, the market mechanism did succeed in reducing the need for expensive new hydraulic infrastructure (the impressive growth in agricultural production has been accomplished without sizeable investments in irrigation infrastructure), improving overall irrigation efficiency and reducing the number of conflicts over water allocation. In addition, recent research has demonstrated that the market mechanism does produce substantial economic gains-from-trade both in inter- and intrasectoral transactions.
The mechanism is not free from problems, particularly regarding intersectoral water allocations and conflict resolution, and sales and transfers of water rights separate from land have been infrequent, involving only a relatively small proportion of water users and relatively little reallocation.
In sum, water trading can be considered a more politically feasible and economically effective instrument of water transfers than either administrative reallocation or full opportunity cost pricing. Governments have usually avoided the compulsory reallocation of water from low-value agricultural uses to higher value urban and industrial ones on political grounds, not to mention those involving concerns about food security and possible compensation costS.47 Furthermore, while the imposition of volumetric pricing in agriculture is usually regarded by farmers as a type of expropriation of the acquired right to a "free good", the establishment of formal water markets actually formalizes existing water rights and is therefore more feasible politically.

The conclusion of a major review of water reuse in the early 1980s namely, that there is plenty of water in the world, but that it is either situated in the wrong place or available at the wrong time as well as relatively costly to transport48 - is relevant here. Its differentiation by location implies that freshwater is primarily a local or regional product and thus that water scarcity cannot be considered a global environmental problem - in .the same manner as, for example, stratospheric ozone depletion -,- even if there is a worldwide series of regional water crises. However, the situation as regards regional scarcity problems has, if anything, deteriorated significantly during the past decade and is expected to worsen even further in the near future. This calls for policies aimed at promoting more efficient water use and a more efficient allocation of scarce water resources among different uses, especially in watershort regions.
The importance of economic instruments of water demand management, such as appropriate pricing and water markets, is basically determined by the relative value of water. There have been obstacles to the introduction of full opportunity cost pricing and cost-recovery strategies, however important these strategies may be to ensuring the financial viability of water-supply companies and reducing the pressure on budgets of pricing subsidies. They are not, in any case, the only tools available for allocating water efficiently among different uses. Water markets can be a feasible and effective mechanism of water reallocation.
As water becomes increasingly scarce in many regions, water trading could play a greater role both in improving water use efficiency and in transferring water to higher-value uses.
As in any structural economic adjustment, moving towards more efficient water use may displace workers and disrupt existing production. It may threaten, in particular, irrigated agriculture, and the challenge in that sector is to move towards means of irrigation that are more efficient or crops that are less water-intensive. This may even mean contraction of the agricultural sector; but the central goal must be to raise employment and production in the economy as a whole - in a sustainable manner and with appropriate attention to income distribution - and thereby raise overall living standards and efficiency.
One of the tasks that macroeconomists set for themselves is to explain - even forecast - the total flow of international trade of a country, that is, the total of goods and services that are transferred between the domestic economy and the rest of the world. The central interest is in the total purchases by foreign residents of local production and by local residents of foreign production. The reason is that together these transactions bear on total expenditure in the domestic economy and thus on total production and employment therein. With certain major exceptions - such as shipping, travel and construction - most services have been considered "non-tradables" and the trade as considered in national income and balance-of-payments analyses was focused almost exclusively on merchandise trade. In recent years, however, more services have become increasingly "tradable", have entered into international trade in greater volumes and warrant an increasing focus of attention by macroeconomists.
Many of these services can be classified as "business services".
They comprise a heterogeneous group of activities, which include communications, financial services, software development, database management, computer services, royalties for the use of proprietary information or designs, accounting services, construction and engineering, advertising, legal services, management and technical consulting.
With the explosion of communications technology and the spread of liberalized trade policies, the effective size of various services markets spilled over borders and some have become global.
Indeed, the relatively new "information age" activities loom large in the growth of the trade in business services, much as they so loomed in the growth of trade in manufactures.
The present chapter surveys the development of international trade in these business services in recent years and demonstrates why analysts of this activity from a trade~cum-macroeconomic perspective must be particularly aware of the partial nature of their viewpoint.

Selling services across borders is not the only - and often not the most prevalent - means for residents of one country to provide services to residents of another. The establishment of a subsidiary in one country by an enterprise from another country is in many sectors a more typical means, as when a foreign owned banking affiliate provides retail banking services in a second country. In fact, direct investment has been the primary means of foreign participationin markets for business 'services that were once local by nature. It is still a major means for delivering services abroad, but, increasingly, so is trade.
The increasing tradability of services is not, however, immediately obvious from the basic data on international trade.2 In 1994, the most recent year for which relatively complete information is available, the global value of trade in all types of services was 22 per cent of the value of merchandise trade. This was virtually the same as the 1970 proportion, which was 21 per cent (see figure XII.l). In 1980, moreover, services were only 19 per cent of the value of trade in merchandise, although it should be noted that petroleum prices, having been unusually high that year, artificially depressed the proportion.
The explanation of the relative constancy in the share of services in international trade lies in the difference in the rates of growth, over the past quarter century, of the value of trade in the main types of services. The value of transportation services in international trade grew more slowly than the average of trade in all goods and services from 1970 to 1980 and from 1980 to 1994.
Indeed, the average cost of transportation services fell dramatically over this period. One rough indication is that it was 9 per cent of the value of merchandise trade in 1970 but 8 per cent in 1980 and about 6.5 per cent in 1994. This reflected, in part, technical change and economies of scale that became feasible under the new technologies (as in bulk cargo carriers, very large tankers and containerized shipping), as well as the lower costs of moving people.
While the growth of travel earnings was slower than the average growth of total trade in goods and services in the 1970s, it has been relatively more rapid in the period since 1980. ("Travel" under balance-of-payments accounting or "tourism" in the System of National Accounts - entails the expenditures, in the "exporting" country, of foreign visitors.) This seems partly to reflect the greater ability to travel of an increasing proportion' of the world's population, and also the increase in business travel that has accompanied the transnational spread of corporations.
In contrast to travel and transportation, however, business services are the one major category of traded services whose international sales grew more rapidly than the total value of trade in goods and services both in the 1970s and in the period since. By 1994, they had become the largest category of services trade, accounting for 42 per cent of the total, with a total value of exports of almost $410 billion.
In developing as well as developed economies, trade in business services grew faster than other service components and faster than merchandise trade in the past 14 years. The developed economies thus almost doubled the share of business services in total services exports between 1970 and 1994, while in the developing countries, the share of business services rose from one fifth to one third (see table XII.1).

The export of business services is mainly provided by the developed economies, which accounted for 88 per cent of the total trade in 1994 (see table XII.2). The world's top seven suppliers, in order of size, were the United States of America, the Netherlands, France, Japan, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Germany and Italy. Together they account for two thirds of world exports of business services. The United States was the largest individual exporter, with $66 billion in 1994. The exports of France and the Netherlands were also quite substantial at $47 billion and $48 billion, respectively.
The developed economies have also been the largest international buyers of business services, although their exports exceeded their imports by $25 billion-$
40 billion a year in the 10 years ending in 1994. Among the seven largest exporters, the United States, the United Kingdom, France and the Netherlands are net exporters, while Germany, Italy and Japan are net importers. This does not necessarily mean that the first group of countries are consistently more competitive suppliers of these services, since provision through direct investment is an alternative to export. It means no more and no less than that, for whatever combination of reasons, the first group are net exporters and the second net importers of traded services.
The United States recorded the largest surplus ($26.5 billion in 1994), which was more than two thirds of the total surplus of the developed economies. Large surpluses in royalties and licence fees and software were major contributing factors. Germany and Japan, on the other hand, have been in chronic deficit in business services trade, their deficits amounting in 1994 to $10 billion and $13 billion, respectively, mainly owing to their large imports of producer services (that is, services used as inputs into the production process). For France, Italy and the Netherlands, a sizeable surplus in construction and engineering has been notable. Among other developed economies, about half - including Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Greece, the Netherlands, Sweden and Switzerland - were net exporters.
The developing economies exported $48 billion in business services in 1994, an amount smaller than that of the United States alone. Most - but not all - developing countries lack the requisite labour, research and development capacity and modern information infrastructures that are essential for competitiveness in these services. The developing countries as a whole have been in deficit of around $2 billion - $7 billion per year in the past decade.
The largest net earners of business service export revenues have been Singapore, Turkey and the Philippines ($6.3 billion, $3.6 billion and $1.7 billion, respectively, in 1994), while Brazil, Thailand and several oil exporting countries have been relatively large net importers (each with deficits in business services trade of at least $1 billion), the latter group of countries especially of oil-related services and construction. 4 Although the level of business services exports of the developing countries is small, it has been growing increasingly rapidly. There are no simple ways to measure this, since services data are usually given in value terms and exchange rates of major currencies have had large swings; however, figure XII.2 shows the average growth rates of business services as measured in special drawing rights (SDRs), a basket of currencies. Indeed, the figure shows that the growth of these exports from developing countries seems to have been less affected by the recession of the early 1990s in the industrialized countries than were the business services exports of the developed countries.
The main thrust in the growth of developing country exports of business services came from the dynamic economies of East and South-East Asia, where the dollar value of exports grew almost 12 per cent annually, a figure significantly higher than that for Latin America (5 per cent) and Africa (2 per cent).
Among the top 30 countries in world trade in business services, 11 were developing countries, of which 5 were Asian economies, namely, the Republic of Korea, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand. They accounted for more than half of the total business service exports from the developing countries in 1994. Singapore led with an export value of almost $12 billion and a surplus in business services trade of over $6 billion. In contrast, the Republic of Korea, Malaysia and Thailand are large importers of business services and persistently run a deficit on the business services account.
Three Latin American countries, Brazil, Chile and Mexico, are also among the world's top 30 exporters, but large imports in Brazil and Mexico have left these two countries with a net deficit of $1 billion - $2 billion each. Although small in scale, certain Caribbean islands have also participated in business services exports, in particular in the area of offshore data entry (for example, Barbados, Jamaica, Saint Lucia and Grenada), while other countries have been significant providers of traditional offshore financial-market activities.
Mrica's business service exports were less than a fifth of those in East and South-East Asia in 1994. Mrica's deficit of $20 billion - $35 billion a year accounted for about two thirds of its overall deficit in services trade. Most of Africa's skill-intensive business services are either imported from developed economies or provided by foreign affiliates and professionals from these countries.
Just as intraregional links in merchandise trade are not well developed in Africa, so, also, is intraregional trade in business services limited, and in the same manner. However, increasing regional efforts to establish a continental communication network and other regional cooperation efforts may begin to promote greater intra-African trade in business services.
Information-related services - telecommunications, software development, computer services and data processing - have been the most dynamic category of business services. World expenditures on information services were estimated to have reached $325 billion in 1995," reflecting advances in information technologies and their applications to a wide range of business activities.
In addition, increased ability to "outsource" these services - to contract them out to independent suppliers - and a surge in demand for the services associated with the restructuring and re-engineering of industries have raised international trade in such services significantly.
The services are provided in a variety of forms: for example, either embod ied in merchandise or disembodied, and sold either directly to final users or through intermediaries, with purchaser and seller either in physical proximity or remote access, and either in individual or in package deals. Moreover, the global structure of the information-related services industry is in great flux.
The technologies in the different services are converging (that is, they are using digital signals to transmit voice, video and data) and this is spawning a wide range of new services firms, while existing firms merge, integrate vertically and diversify.
The United States is the main provider of information services, having held in 1994 a 46 per cent share of the international market, a larger share than that of the Western European economies taken together (32.5 per cent).' The United States holds a technological lead and provides a wide range of products which mostly have already been tested in its large, sophisticated domestic market. It also benefits from the dominant usage of English. United States exports of telecommunications, computer services and database services, excluding shipments to foreign affiliates, grew at about 10 per cent annually during 1986-1994 and reached $6 billion in 1994.3 European countries and Japan are major importers. European countries, however, are competitive in various segments of the market and have been expanding to other regions rapidly.
There is a large gap in terms of skill and technology with respect to these services between the developed and developing countries. Information services in most developing countries are still in their infancy and most core parts are imported from the developed economies; but as the usage of computers spreads and communication infrastructure improves, demand for those services is increasing rapidly, indeed, at 10-15 per cent annually in many developing countries. Their exports - mainly, labour-intensive activities in dynamic economies in Asia - are also growing fast. Indeed, opportunities for exports of such services have been opening in recent years, as firms in the developed economies expand their outsourcing of these services to developing countries.

Communication services are an especially important part of the information market. Internationally, as within many domestic economies, supplies have traditionally been less than competitive in the sense that customer charges, especially in the case of telephone services, have included significant and differential economic rents, as well as costs of service delivery. The standard mechanism has been one where national authorities (state telecommunications companies or national regulators) establish prices for international connections to the domestic system, as a result of which the charges can be quite different for a telephone call over comparable equipment from one country to either of two other countries despite their being an equal distance from the first.
In any event, the total revenue of the developed economies from sales of public telecommunication services was estimated to be $395 billion in 1992.
The United States accounted for about 41 per cent of the total in 1992. Telephone service is the main segment of communication services, but new services such as cable television, "value-added" services (including a variety of specialized services that can be accessed through the regular telephone network or via special carrier network), data transmission and mobile telephones constitute very dynamic sectors. The convergence of technologies, as noted above, and deregulation are expected to heighten competition, stimulate growth and bring about a substantial development of the market. Alliances among firms that specialize in different components of these services have already begun to intensify.
Total revenue in communication services in the developed economies grew about 9 per cent annually during 1990-1993. Growth in the United States was somewhat below this figure, at 6 per cent, although it has the dominant position.
The rapid increase in demand for communication services is attributed to falling communication cost, increasing transportability of services and expanding digital communication networks as well as increased international trade and investment. Liberalization and deregulation in this sector, leading to more competitive pricing, have also stimulated the growth of demand.
Among developing economies, East and South-East Asia is the most dynamic region in the telecommunications sector. Export revenues in a number of countries in the region grew very rapidly in the past decade, albeit from a low base. China's revenues from international telecommunications also grew rapidly, indeed, by 56 per cent per year in this period, reflecting China's growing integration into the international economy.
Many developing countries have been installing digital communication systems and a number of those with the necessary technological base and skilled human resources may be able to leapfrog the mainly analog systems to a higher stage of technological sophistication directly. Given the huge cost of building a dominant communication network, however, firms in developing countries are making strategic alliances with firms in the developed economies to secure access to global communication networks.
The Asian experience is nevertheless not typical. In particular, development of the communications sector is at an early stage in Africa, although efforts have begun there to strengthen telecommunication infrastructures and connect their systems to world networks.
With the growing connections of personal computers to networks and the application of new technologies to other industries, demand for software is increasing rapidly. As the interface among different systems becomes more complex, a share of business is shifting from hardware to software services.
Global economic expansion also feeds demand.
Software is one of the especially confusing, grey areas in international trade between merchandise and services. While software that is written explicitly for a foreign customer is clearly a service export, packaged software that is massmarketed might seem to be more in the nature of merchandise, and it is often recorded as such in trade accounts; however, as the value of packaged software greatly exceeds the cost of the physical product, owing to its being of the nature of intellectual property, it is more properly classified as a service export.
In any event, world revenue from packaged software grew over 15 per cent annually in the first half of the 1990s, reaching $95 billion in 1995.11 The United States is the dominant supplier in the world software market, having provided about 75 per cent of the $70 billion world total of packaged software in 1993. Its foreign sales of packaged software were estimated at $24 billion in 1993, compared with purchases of only $4 billion from foreign vendors. The shares of Western Europe and Japan remain small, but competition is intensifying.
Indeed, it has driven down software prices substantially.
Software industries in several dynamic economies in Asia and a number of economies in Latin America (including Argentina, Brazil, China, Hong Kong, India, Mexico, the Republic of Korea, the Philippines, Singapore and Taiwan Province of China) have exhibited a very rapid growth in the past decade, albeit from a very small base. However, software production is still relatively small in volume and rudimentary, even though some of these economies have become significant producers of hardware. Most sophisticated software is imported. Countries in Latin America, such as Argentina, Brazil and Mexico, have been trying to establish information industries and their software production grew rapidly during the 1980s. However, this production was mainly in less sophisticated areas, such as administrative and accounting applications.
In many African countries, personal computers have been introduced only recently and while some after-sale services are being performed, software services are generally small.
One notable development in the past decade is that a number of developing countries, including Brazil, China, India, Mexico and the Philippines, have experienced a surge in exports of labour-intensive computer services, including data entry and programming. This reflected the surge in outsourced demand for these services and a shortage of computer professionals in the developed economies.
India is a case in point. Domestic software production is growing rapidly and software is being exported. In fiscal 1994/95, India's domestic software sales increased 54 per cent to 11 billion Indian rupees (Rs) and software exports grew by 50 per cent to about $500 million.Endowed with a pool of well-qualified computer professionals whose wages are less than a fifth of those in developed economies, India can be highly competitive in this sector, where labour cost'is a major part of total production cost. The Indian Government has also provided incentives to encourage foreign investment inflow and exports.
All in all, India's software industry is going through a rapid transformation from data processing based on low-cost labour to more sophisticated software development projects. To take advantage of these opportunities, an increasing number of foreign firms have been moving towards India and other countries with comparable situations.
Developments in the information sector have also stimulated the growth of other business service sectors, perhaps most notably that part of the financial services industry whose operations are closely dependent upon the transmission and processing of information. These services include banking, insurance and securities exchanges. The technical possibility of the remote processing of information and the falling cost of information transmission, together with liberalization and deregulation in financial markets, led to the rapid globalization of financial services and the emergence of new, complicated - even customized - financial instruments. Through global communication networks, massive international financial trading can now occur routinely with remote places and at any time around the clock.
Thus, trade in financial services has rapidly expanded since the late 1980s.
In the developed economies, this process has progressed at a much faster pace than in the developing countries. Virtually all banks in the developed economies are now linked to international information networks either through their own networks or by leasing of network services from others. Financial services provided by resident banks of major industrialized economies to foreign customers almost doubled during 1987-1990. United States exports of financial services grew 10 per cent annually in the past decade.
Developing countries generally lag far behind the developed countries in both technological applications and the liberalization of the financial sector. In the past decade, however, in an increasing number of developing countries, particularly in Asia, financial markets have been liberalized substantially and this has facilitated the inroads of financial firms from the developed economies. In many developing countries, however, concern about the infancy of their financial industries, costs of accessing global financial networks and the poor state of communication infrastructure have inhibited the integration of their financial markets into the international market.
In addition to dynamic "information age" services, there is also considerable international trade in more traditional business service sectors. One such sector is construction and engineering, where a combination of two different types of human resources are required: highly skilled professionals and semiskilled labour.'6 Because of this, international contracts are often in the form of joint ventures between firms in developed and developing countries.
For the component that requires highly skilled professionals, such as consulting engineering, the developed countries dominate the market. On the basis of the revenues of the top 225 firms, contractors of the developed countries account for 89 per cent of total international construction revenue of $92 billion in 1994. Japan has the largest share (20 per cent), followed by the United States, France, the United Kingdom and Germany (with shares of 16, 13, 12 and II per cent, respectively)Y Competition among developed countries is stiff. Among developing countries, China, which is competitive in labour-intensive projects, has emerged as a major exporter. In 1994, it earned almost $3 billion, an amount close to the revenue of the largest exporter, the Republic of Korea. Its technical sophistication is growing rapidly.
Among regional markets of developing countries, East and South-East Asia is most dynamic. Construction contracts for this region range widely from infrastructure projects, such as powerplants and transportation systems, to chemical plants, refineries, other manufacturing facilities and large buildings.
Countries in the region import key parts of the construction from multinational companies, owing to inadequate domestic expertise and financial resources;
but some of these countries also export construction services, as noted above.
In sub-Saharan Africa, owing to unavailable expertise, poor equipment, low technology, inadequate financing and foreign exchange constraints, local consultancy and engineering services are generally not internationally competitive and major parts of consulting projects go to European consultants.
In other components of business services, such as legal services, accounting, medical services, broadcasting, cinema and advertising, cross-border transactions are constrained by regulatory barriers, ranging from restrictions on qualifications required before a foreign provider is allowed to perform a service in a country, to outright prohibition for reasons of national security, public health and cultural protection. Technological barriers in the same services, however, have been reduced significantly, inter alia, through advances in information technologies, and such trade has indeed been growing.

The growth of international trade in business services is part and parcel of the growth of services in economic activity globally. In 1970, services (including construction) accounted for 55 per cent of the combined gross product of developed and developing countries. By 1990, the share had risen to 65 per cent, owing almost entirely to the growth of the category of services that includes the ones that have entered into international trade. 19 Although the economic importance of services has risen highest in the developed economies, the expansion has also strongly affected developing countries. The growing role of services arises not only out of the growing demand for services by consumers, which accompanies rising incomes, but also from the increasing demand by firms for producer services. Furthermore, the conservation of materials and the miniaturization of products have been conducive to an increase in the share of services embodied in industrial output. In addition to these general factors, there are other specific determinants of the dynamism of international trade in business services.
For business services to be traded internationally, they have first to be provided as a separate, identifiable business activity and second to be offered for sale across borders. Technical change has fostered the viability of separable and specialized business service firms that can interact over long distances. In addition to technical change, the spread of transnational corporations around the world and the relaxation of regulations and trade barriers have also made for greater international trade in these services.
Large corporations have been prominent in overseas industrial production for a century or more; so, too, have large business service firms, particularly in banking and insurance; but whereas the industrial investments were typically related to international trade in one way or another, the services investments were more in the nature of a foreign entity establishing itself in a host country and providing a service to the local market (the exception, of course, being international trade financing). Now, however, services investments are more like industrial ones: trade is a key part of the story.
The reasons for the change seem grounded in the wave of technical change (still going on) that has multiplied the number of separable business services, often reduced the cost of providing them on a large scale and allowed them to be produced at a distance from the customer. In some cases these business services have become standardized (allowing, for example, use of "off-the-shelf'
accounting software) and in some other cases the opportunities for customized services have been enhanced (for example, through contracting with a foreign firm of computer programmers to design a customized accounting system).
The "information revolution" is at the centre of the entire process, particularly in the form of computerization and the transmission of computer-readable information over digital networks. The continuing rush of technical innovation in this area and its quick diffusion have revolutionized the speed and volume of information transfers several times in a generation.
The number of business service activities that have to be carried out "face to face" continues to decline; the opportunities for a finer division of labour continue to grow. Firms find themselves closing down their own in-house capacity to provide particular services and purchasing them from independent suppliers instead. As communications capacities swell, the suppliers that might once have had to be in the same city as the customer can increasingly be located anywhere on the planet. With rapid technical change occurring in the information and communication networks, the performance of an increasing number of services is no longer critically dependent on physical presence.
Such disembodiment now takes place in a context where services are simply transmitted over the wire to users.Indeed, there is a strong competitive pressure to reduce costs by unbundling segments of producer services and relocating them to other places within one country or to other countries where complementary inputs are cheaper or where demand for the separated services has significant potential.
As the technological barrier to international trade in services has been falling, so too have policy barriers, although many still exist. Currently, the level of artificial barriers in business service trade is much higher than in merchandise trade. Barriers take the form of direct control of cross-border movement of services, restrictions on service-related investment, and discouragement of trade through administrative procedures, taxes and ownership standards.
Market pressures to reduce these barriers have come both from firms wishing to provide the services to a market they cannot yet access and from potential buyers of the services. Such pressures have put liberalization of this trade high in the agenda in an increasing number of countries.
A case in point is financial services. International sales of financial services - for example, buying and selling of securities for foreign clients and research into the performance of locally listed companies for foreign stock traders accompanied the liberalization of the financial flows in national markets in developed and developing countries. For the most part, the service trade in this area is closely associated with direct investment by foreign financial institutions.
In the case of the Republic of Korea, the number of foreign bank branches increased from 16 in 1975 to 98 in 1995 and the number of affiliates and branches of foreign securities and insurance companies increased from 7 in 1980 to 78 in 1995.
Transnational service firms could sell in a foreign market without investing there directly, but investment and sales of services through their own entities seem to be a preferred modality. In any event, it is clearly the case that the role of services firms - in this case, a larger classification than just business services - has grown substantially as a share of direct foreign investment. In the case of Canada, France, the United Kingdom and the United States, about half of the total stock of foreign investment by national enterprises was in the services sector, reflecting in each case the growing presence of the sector over time (see table XII.3). Services also figure prominently in the foreign invest ments that these countries host. In the cases of Germany, Italy and Japan, about two thirds of the stock of foreign investment was in services. Investments by foreign services firms in these economies have also been very strong, albeit less so in Japan. A similar trend can be seen in the developing countries.
The discussion in this chapter might be quite discouraging to the macroeconomist who wants to explain the export and import of business services.
The conventional theories of trade in merchandise are more straightforward than the comparable theory for trade in business services would have to be.
The reason is only partly that business services are a very heterogeneous collection of activities. There is a more fundamental problem, over and above the issue of heterogeneity, namely, that the services can be provided in more ways than goods can be, and for each way, in proportions that are the result of a myriad of factors.
At the heart of many internationally traded business services is an intangible asset - a "piece" of intellectual property - that gives the providing firm a competitive advantage in selling the service. If the firm licenses its product (or trade mark), it receives royalties, which are counted as an export of a business service. If it invests directly in a foreign country, it receives investment income, constituting another category of flow and one with a different time path. If it incorporates its technology or trade mark into a product that is exported, this is recorded as an export of a good in the balance of payments.
These are merely three ways of extracting an economic rent from the intellectual property.
The point may be clarified with an example. Suppose that we want to measure trade and specialization in a specific sub-industry, say, word-processing programmes. If a company ships its software and manuals for sale abroad, this may be recorded as a merchandise export. If it sells these materials to a computer company that preloads them, then exports the computer, this is included in the value of the exported machine. If it sends just one copy of the software to a foreign firm that pays royalties in order to make further copies for sale or to preload in computers, this will show up in the balance of payments as an export of a business service. Finally, if the firm opens an overseas branch, the economic rents on sale of the software would be recorded as part of the revenues of the branch and will be a determinant of its profits which, when repatriated, enter the balance of payments as investment income.
In sum, it appears that the economist seeking an explanation for business services trade would need to include in that explanation the determinants of the substitutability of the goods, services and investment modes for capturing the economic rents. Moreover, the rents can often be increasingly timebound, even ephemeral, owing to the possibility of a rapid erosion of the superiority of the technology and knowledge. Thus, analysing the flow of business services as if that flow were independent of the flow of related goods, direct investment and even technological sequences might not suffice; indeed, such an approach can be a problem for the analysis of trade in particular goods as well. It is always a problem, however, for the analysis of trade in business services, and to ignore it would be to act like the three blind men in the parable who, from where they stood, described an elephant according to the parts they could touch...

Following the development disappointments of the 1930s, the economic upheavals associated with the political transformations in several countries at the turn of the decade and the recession in the developed market economies in the early 1990s, the world economy is experiencing widespread economic growth as it moves towards the close of the millennium. Many countries have built a foundation of more sustainable national policies and the international economic environment is more propitious. Barring unpredictable shocks, the present level and pattern of growth are likely to be maintained and in some cases improved in 1997. The momentum is encouraging; but it is not spread widely enough.
The economic and social setbacks brought about by the previous disruptions are far from overcome in some parts of the developing world and in the economies that are in transition from planned to market systems. Unemployment is an immediate concern in the transition economies and in many parts of the developing world. It is also a highly salient issue even in the richest countries of the world. Moreover, most of the long-standing development challenges persist. In particular, the difference in well-being between the world's most fortunate citizens and its least fortunate ones remains unacceptably large and the number of people living in absolute poverty is intolerably high.
In order to address these problems, the high rates of economic growth that some developing countries have achieved must be extended to the slower-growing developing economies, as well as to the economies in transition. In addition, developed countries must not sacrifice economic growth and jobs to achieve their other policy goals with undue speed. Economic growth, by itself, does not solve all economic and social problems and is not to be promoted above all other goals of policy. Nevertheless, the global aspiration for sustainable economic and social development requires solid rates of economic expansion as part of the enabling environment.
The world economy grew 3 per cent in 1996 and it is forecast to grow at the same rate in 1997 (see table 1.1). This will make the third year in the most recent four in which world output growth has reached that level.! After a disappointing start to the decade, the world economy is on a growth trend that exceeds that of the 1980s. It also appears to be a sustainable growth trend in that inflation rates have fallen in most countries and are being further reduced in others, while excessive fiscal deficits have been broadly curtailed.
The world's econmnies in 1996 and 1997
Among the developed economies, some countries are combining moderate growth of output with low inflation and are seeking to extend their economic expansions over unprecedented lengths without a cyclical break. Others are at earlier stages of cyclical expansion, but none is in outright recession. Most developed economies, however, have not generated adequate job growth and unemployment rates, remaining excessive, represent a waste of human resources and a drain on fiscal budgets.
This is especially the case in Western Europe, where unemployment remained high: it even worsened in France and Germany when economic growth faltered in 1996. The overriding policy objective for many countries in Western Europe has been to achieve the fiscal targets required to obtain membership in the Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) of the European Union. While reduction of fiscal deficits in Europe to more sustainable levels and creation of EMU are expected to yield important benefits over the longer run, the effort to reach these targets by the end of 1997 has reduced economic growth in the preceding period. In 1997 itself, this may be offset to some extent by less restrictive monetary policies and by exchange-rate movements among the major currencies: the relative strength of the dollar (and also the British pound) against the deutsche mark and the currencies that closely track it should have a favourable effect on the tradable goods sectors of the continental European countries.
In several of the developed countries, there is a significant structural unemployment problem. The longer unemployment lasts, the more it fosters a social isolation that makes reintegration into the employed labour force more difficult.
Short-term increases in economic growth, per se, will not solve this problem, but sustained higher rates of economic growth will encourage greater investment rates that, coupled with structural reform policies, can bolster the demand for labour.
Most transition economies have begun their economic recovery, although only Poland has reached a level of output that matches that of the pre-transition years. One important disappointment in 1996 was that the expected beginning of recorded economic growth in the Russian Federation failed to materialize, owing to unanticipated uncertainties that now seem to be past. Output there is forecast to begin increasing this year. 2Resumption of sustained growth is an essential step in the transition process: much of the structural transformation of production will be embodied in investment and, even with the implementation of institutional changes that are prerequisites of growth, growing output and incomes are necessary to encourage enterprises to undertake that investment.
The rate of growth of the developing countries as a group is at its highest in many years. This acceleration is due more to a broadening of the numbers of growing countries than to faster rates of growth in a limited number of countries.
Of the 95 developing countries that are monitored for the preparation of the Survey, only 113 failed to increase per capita output in 1996, compared with 24 in 1995. A larger number of the same group of countries achieved growth of per capita output of 3 per cent or more in 1996 (see table 1.2). Moreover, this group of more rapidly growing countries accounted for about 70 per cent of the population of the developing countries; in the early years of the decade, well under half the population of the developing world lived in countries growing at this rate.
The broadening of the reach of economic growth in developing countries to include an increasing number of the lower-income countries represents a heartening contrast to the situation in the 1980s. However, many least developed countries have still not achieved these higher rates of growth and, particularly for the poorer countries, even the current rate of progress is insufficient. As pointed out in a previous Survey", low-income countries need to maintain higher rates of growth if they are to achieve even moderate levels of income per capita within a reasonable time. In the current environment, the objective should be for the low-income countries to achieve as a long-term average, with the support of their development cooperation partners, at least the 3 per cent per annum increase in income per head that many developing countries achieved in 1996.
Although Asian economies have achieved such growth rates for many years, for Africa and Latin America and the Caribbean a 3 per cent average annual rate of growth per capita would represent a new departure. In Africa, output per capita fell on average in the 1980s and has fallen thus far in the 1990s; in Latin America, it fell in the 1980s and grew by only 1.5 per cent a year in 1991-1996 (see table A.l).
Thus, the stronger growth of output and incomes in Africa in 1996, which is expected to continue in 1997, if at a slightly reduced rate, is a dramatic change from the past (see table A.4). More than half of Africa's population is less than 20 years of age and growth in the region in 1996 was the highest in their lifetime.
The improvement in economic growth can be attributed in part to several temporary factors, including improved weather, the lingering effects of relatively high commodity prices at mid-decade, and substantially higher petroleum prices in 1996. However, other factors promise to have more long-lasting effects, including spreading macroeconomic stability and structural reforms.
This notwithstanding, the region remains the one most dependent on official international assistance, which promises to be available in increasingly stringent amounts, and it has the least access to private international investment and credit. Investors are discouraged by the continuing heavy debt burdens of many African countries. In this regard, the new international initiative to reduce the debt of a number of heavily indebted poor countries holds out the promise of removing this constraint on development for the countries that can access the new arrangements (see below).
In the case of Latin America, the most encouraging aspect of economic performance in 1996 was the speed with which the region recovered from the Mexican financial crisis of 1995. Besides the recovery of domestic economic activity, there has been a resumption of international capital flows, its rapidity being in marked contrast to the time taken by lenders to re-enter the market after the debt crises of the 1980s. This international confidence augurs well for the region's short-term growth prospects, although both individual countries and the region as a whole remain vulnerable to a sudden reversal of these flows, as was last the case for some countries in 1994 when interest rates in the United States of America rose unexpectedly.
At the same time, some of the other consequences of the recessions in Argentina and Mexico in 1995 persist; in particular, little progress has been made in reducing the unemployment produced by the recession and accentuated by the natural increase in the labour force. However, the problem is not restricted to these two countries: even those countries in the region that did not suffer such a setback in 1995 are facing major difficulties with unemployment.
There are increasing signs that some of the stylized facts about global linkages are becoming less definitive. As was pointed out in the 1996 World Economic and Social Survey," growth in the developing countries is now less closely tied to that of the developed countries. In 1996, the acceleration in the growth of world output occurred despite a slowdown in world trade from its exceptional growth in 1994 and 1995: world export volume grew only 4.6 per cent in 1996, after growth rates of 10 per cent in 1994 and 1995. Looking ahead, the volume of world trade is expected to increase in 1997 by almost 8 per cent and provide one of the stimuli for a further increase in global production.
This latter increase, however, is expected to be modest.
The combination of faster growth of output with a slower growth of world trade in 1996 underlines the fact that several other dimensions of the international economic environment, as well as national policies, were broadly favourable in 1996. International interest rates tended to be modestly lower and international capital flows remained buoyant. There continued to be a sizeable net transfer of financial resources to developing countries - $37 billion to the net-debtor developing countries as a group in 1996 - albeit still concentrated in relatively few countries.
The dynamic elements of international flows to developing countries are all private and these have been especially concentrated. Indeed, 10 countries accounted for over three-quarters of the private flows in 1996. Nevertheless, direct investment and capital market flows continue to spread among developing economies, as domestic economic situations increasingly stabilize and legal and institutional reforms begin to take hold. A key concern, however, is the curtailed supplies of official flows, particularly official development assistance (ODA), for support of those countries and for those activities that are not typically the focus of private investment.
ODA fell to 0.27 per cent of the GDP of the developed donor countries in 1995 and preliminary indications are that ODA fell in 1996, with no signs of a reversal in 1997. While this decline will not affect all developing countries equally, it seems inevitable that it will result in some fall-off in concessional flows to low-income countries, from either bilateral or multilateral sources or from both.
This is most disquieting at a time when there is an unparalleled opportunity for the productive use of such resources by the world's poorest countries. Many of the necessary elements are now in place for making a concerted attack on poverty and underdevelopment. A majority of the low-income countries at present have democratically elected Governments and most of them have set in motion the strategies, policies and practices that are generally perceived as being conducive to economic growth, including an opening of their economies to the pressures of global markets. In this arena, however, they face an increasingly competitive environment, for which many of them are inadequately equipped in terms of human and physical capital. Private sources are unlikely to provide either the volume or the type of resources required to meet these needs. Lacking such resources, there is a risk that these countries will become further marginalized in world society, presenting the international community of the next generation with an even greater, if possibly somewhat different, challenge.
With regard to one important component of official flows, in 1996 agreement was reached on a means of addressing the debt overhang of low-income countries. The Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Debt Initiative of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund may go a long way towards removing this impediment to development in many of the poorest countries. It is noteworthy that, by the time official creditors devised this means of resolving the debt problems of those countries, middle-income countries with debt crises in the 1980s had already largely settled their debt difficulties and private creditors had reopened lending to many of them. The effort to help the poorest countries put their debt difficulties behind them needs to be fully implemented as rapidly as possible. It is incumbent on all those involved to proceed with the new initiative speedily and flexibly in order to ensure that economic growth in these countries is not hindered further.


One economic objective of Governments worldwide during the 1990s has been to reduce fiscal deficits. This has been motivated in part by the recognition that deficits in many cases already were, or were becoming, unsustainably large, with deleterious effects on economic performance currently and in the future. However, the period has also been typified by a more general desire to reduce the economic and social role of government:
Part two of the World Economic and Social Survey, 1997 reviews some of these fiscal consolidation experiences, focusing on the processes that have been followed in implementation. One overriding conclusion is that, probably to a greater extent than in any other area of economic management, the implementation of fiscal policy is dominated by political, rather than technical, considerations.
This reinforces the case for a country-by-country approach and militates against the application of predetermined rules or targets. Similarly, there can be no universally agreed definition of the appropriate economic and social role of the State: such a definition is embedded in the political, economic and social heritage of each country. The country experiences examined in part two of the Survey illustrate the ways in which these factors have affected various efforts to redefine the role of the State in the 1990s.
In many countries, fiscal consolidation has been an element of broader programmes of stabilization and structural adjustment. Effectively situating fiscal consolidation within more comprehensive adjustment programmes appears to have been one criterion for their success.
Anti-inflationary policies have often been a central part of the policy package.
They appear to have succeeded in reducing the rate of price increases to historic lows in many cases. Triple-digit rates of annual inflation in developing countries have become an exception, with several developing countries having succeeded in attaining annual inflation rates comparable with those that used to characterize the developed countries. (The developed countries themselves have forced their own inflation rates even lower.) Although the rate of inflation in many of the economies in transition remains higher than elsewhere, these countries, with a few notable exceptions, are making steady progress in reducing the rapid price increases that accompanied the decontrol of their economies.
The widespread progress towards macroeconomic stability has been accompanied, as promised, by higher growth in many countries. However, unemployment has reached, and remains at, historically high levels in many countries.
This suggests that progress towards macroeconomic stability has not yet been matched by comparable success in achieving the stmctural adjustments necessary to absorb the labour that has been shed in undertaking some of the reforms.
The present unemployment in the economies in transition has arisen directly as a result of the effort to restmcture their economies. In the western part of Europe, a large part of the unemployment problem is also recognized as being structural. In most other parts of the world, unemployment remains a longstanding problem but one that has been exacerbated in recent years. It has now become acute in many developing countries and is giving rise to social unrest in a number of cases. Unless the problem is successfully addressed, it is likely to threaten the political stability that is a prerequisite of economic growth.
Having achieved a remarkable degree of success in controlling inflation,
Governments need to turn their attention to examining these issues and to devising policies that address the human and social objective of reducing unemployment. In developing countries, the challenge continues to lie in creating employment at a faster rate than that of the increase in the labour force, if the unemployed and underemployed are to be absorbed. While the rate of population growth has slowed in most developing countries in recent years (see table A.l), the present growth of the labour force reflects the faster population growth rate of a decade or two ago. A growth rate of output per capita of 3 per cent annually is a benchmark that would meet this challenge.
Besides reviewing the current global economic situation, the World Economic and Social Survey seeks to foster international discussion of economic and social issues with a significant policy dimension. In addition to the review of fiscal adjustment in part two of the present Survey, there is a review in part three of selected issues that have been the subject of international attention elsewhere.
In 1995, the Survet concluded that some of the expectations of a "peace dividend" resulting from the end of the cold war had proved to be unrealistic.
On this occasion, chapter IX of the 1997 Survey examines another supposed benefit of the end of the cold war, namely the decline in the international arms trade. Here again, it is found that the improvement, in terms of reduced threats to international security because of reduced arms sales, may be less than the simple data suggest. While government-to-government arms sales have fallen considerably, economic forces have given rise to the existence of new actors in the arms trade and new arrangements for arms transfers. These have been accompanied by a proliferation of civilian products that also have military uses. Although much has changed, the arms trade continues to pose a threat to international peace and security.
Continuing the series of analyses of some of the more dynamic areas of international trade in earlier Surveys, 7 part three of this Survey includes an examination of the growth of international travel as an element of trade in services. International travel has been both a foundation of, and an opportunity offered by, globalization. As such, it has expanded rapidly over the past two decades and assumed a larger share of both global output and world trade. Its recent growth has been greatest in the developing countries, albeit from a small base. As indicated in chapter X, it continues to offer great opportunities but countries wishing to avail themselves of these need to take a number of actions in order to do so.
Part three also draws attention to two current international development challenges -- one relatively short-term and calling for action at the national level, and the other of a longer-term character and calling for an international response. Chapter VIII examines the resurgence of tuberculosis which now accounts for about 4-5 per cent of deaths worldwide. Tuberculosis is highly infectious and is spreading rapidly in Africa and Asia, as well as in some of the former economies in transition. The disease has high economic as well as social costs since the overwhelming number of victims are in the most economically active period of their lives (between ages 15 and 49). The present epidemic is partially a result of human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (HIV/AIDS) but, unlike that disease, tuberculosis can be controlled with existing drugs at relatively low cost. However, this requires government intervention and sustained (but comparatively modest) government funding. This is one example of changed circumstances calling for flexibility in government expenditure policy. Governments around the world must recognize the magnitude of the threat and allocate the resources, human as well as financial, necessary to tackle it.
Whereas the solution to the tuberculosis problem is clear, there is controversy about the answer to the longer-term problem of carbon dioxide (C02) emissions. It is generally agreed that present patterns of energy consumption and CO2 emissions are not sustainable over the longer term, but there is less agreement about the magnitude of the problem and possible solutions to it. As a contribution to this discussion, chapter XI uses a number of hypothetical scenarios to explore the possible evolution of energy consumption and CO2 emissions. The analysis suggests that present policies to limit CO2 emissions in the developed countries will be insufficient to bring about the necessary global reduction if the developing countries double their present one-third share of global energy consumption (and therefore of CO2 emissions) by the year 2050.
There is thus a need to develop, in line with the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, global approaches to complement the regional strategies for dealing with CO2 emissions.
There was a strengthemng and a in much of the world in 1996. Equally the conditions appear to he in place for this situation to continue in 1997.
The solid performance of many countries in 1996 is particularly encouraging and has two characteristics.
First, Mrica achieved its highest rate of economic for ahout two decades. More importantly, this in Mrica covered ahnost the whole of the continent: at least seven out of every Mricans lived in countries with per in 1996. This is unprecedented in recent melnory. Much of Africa has seen incomes per capita fall so far that a continuation of these new developments could he the most sign in a time.
Second, in 1996 hoth Mexico and were able to quiddy resume growth after the sethack in 1995 and for the Latin American region as a whole rose The recession in these two countries in 1995 had heen the hehaviour of international capital markets and there were fears of more far-reaching and long-terln consequences.
Asia remains the fastest-growing region of the world. There was a continuation of the recent convergence in rates among its suhregions in 1996. West Asia was ahle to on the oil prices in 1996, while various constraints the very rates of growth in China and South-East Asia.
The economies in transition registered a further decline in OllltplUt in 1996, hut the fall was the smallest since the transition ut::~<ltn.
There was positive, alheit slower, in Central and Eastern Europe, hut this was yet another decline in output in the Commonwealth of Independent States While of macroeconomic relnain in a nUlnher of these most of the economies in transition further progress in reducing inflation and this is to be reflected in growth for the group as a whole in 1997.
The acceleration in Japan was for the small increase in the growth of the hut 1997 outlook for Japan is weaker than that of 1996. The economy of the United States of America, while I!ro~vinl! more rapidly than the Western there is expected to be some acceleration in Europe, as well as in the United States.
With respect to policy stances, reducing inflation has been a primary economic objective throughout the world and considerable success has been achieved on this front. Related to this, there have been widespread efforts to reduce fiscal deficits. Such policies have improved the macroeconomic underpinning of national economies.
Nevertheless, in many countries, mediuln-term growth prospects remain uncertain and recent growth has not been accompanied by sufficient increases in employment.
In 1996, the developed economies grew by 2.4 per cent, a figure representing somewhat faster growth than in 1995; growth in 1997 is expected to show a further modest increase (see table A.2). Growth is accelerating in North America and Western Europe, while in Japan and Australia economic activity is expected to be slower in 1997 as a whole than in 1996.
This moderate growth at a time of favourable monetary conditions is partly due to simultaneous multi-year efforts to cut budget deficits. In 1997, fiscal policy is expected to stay tight in most developed countries. At least in the short term, this acts as a brake on demand. More generally, Governments and central banks are giving high priority to achieving and maintaining a stable macroeconomic environment and thus are not likely to allow growth of aggregate demand to deviate significantly from what they consider to be a relatively steady non-inflationary pace. This dampens real growth in the recovery phase but could lead to more durable and stable expansion over the longer run.
The growth momentum is being supported by previous and continuing reductions in short-term interest rates (see table A.S). Longer-term interest rates have fallen as well, with growing confidence that inflation will not be reignited. In many countries, however, long-term rates still seem high, especially in the light of reduced-inflation expectations. .
The strengthening of the dollar against most major currencies since April 1995 has provided an additional stimulus to economic growth in several developed economies. Especially in Europe, a prolonged period of inventory correction is likely to be coming to an end, leading to increased output demand.
After significant swings over the past two years, inventories are expected to track final demand more closely, thereby exerting a neutral or slightly positive influence on growth.
There has been considerable success achieving the objectives of low inflation (see table A.7). The average rate of inflation in the current expansion has been at its lowest since the 1960s. Consumer price increases in 1997 are likely to remain at an average somewhat above 2 per cent.
After multi-year fiscal consolidation efforts, coupled with a monetary policy aimed at pre-empting a rise in inflation, most countries have created a stable macroeconomic environment that should be the basis for long-term sustainable growth. Yet this strategy has not yet brought about a significant decline in unemployment overall, although there have been important employment gains in some countries (see table A.6). In the United States, the unemployment rate onmrlfOrl to close to its low. Unemployment has also fallen in the United of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to below its average in the 1980s. In the rest of Europe, unemployment remains very high by historical standards and may continue to worsen in some countries, notably GE,rUlafly and Japanese unemployment also remains very high by historical standards.
Reducing unemployment is a high political objective in most of these countries. as will be discussed below, it is realized that for them to obtain the full benefits from a stable macroeconomic environment in the form of job-creating growth and to more effectively in the incTeasingly globalized wodd economy, many structural issues must be addressed - in labour and markets, in education and training, in research and development, in the financing of social services and in the provision of infrastructure.
The year 1997 is of especial importance in that progress of the European countries towards achieving the fiscal criteria established by the Maastricht Union of 1992 (see box V2) will help determine how the European Union goes ahead with one of the most important economic initiatives of the the creation of a single European cunency in January 1999. must determine, in particular, which countries will be in the first wave of entrants.
After six years of expansion, the economy of the United States remains robust. The' rate dropped to 5,3 per cent at the end of 1996 from a peak of 7.3 per cent in 1992 (see table 11.1). As of April 1997, the unerrlpl,JYlnellt rate had slipped below 5 per cent. This low rate of unemployment has been an annual rate of inflation that is expected to stay at around 3 per cent. This combination of low unemployment and subdued inflation, the notable characteristic of the current recovery, has evolved only for the second time in the post-war era and is raising questions about whether there has been a structural change in the relationship of inflation and unemployment other whether there has been a fall in the "non-accelerating inflation rate of (NAIRU)). starting from the fourth quarter of 1996, business investment in the United States, the principal engine of its recovery in the earlier years, has been slowing and from an almost exclusive focus on equipment to a more balanced that includes spending on structures. This implies a greater focus on expansion. Consumer spending has been gaining momentum, the combination of strong labour markets, faster  still moderate - wage growth, and rising household wealth, High stock and house have contributed to the last-mentioned. Consumer confidence in the United States rose during 1996 (see figure 11.1) and str'engtflenled further in 1997. The outlook for exports is likely to improve as up in the rest of the developed world and in Latin America.
The Canadian economy seems to heading into a period of growth of above 3.0 per cent. A decline in both shOli- and long-term interest rates since eady 1995 was made low inflation (averaging 1.3 per cent annually over the 3 and progress in fiscal consolidation. Lower interest rates have begun boosting domestic demand; final sales have been strong since late 1995, with growth in private consumption reflecting a rise in consumer confidence (see figure 11.1). The weakest component of demand will remain government spending, owing to continued fiscal austerity at all levels of government. Because of further cutbacks in public sector employment, joblessness, which is almost twice as high as in the United States, is not expected to decrease substantially (see table A.6). There remains considerable slack in labour and product markets owing to the relatively sluggish recovery from the 1990-1991 recession.
The Japanese economy grew robustly in 1996 for the first time since 1991. A huge public spending programme, which began in 1992, boosted spending, while government fixed investment and private housing investment registered an almost double-digit increase last year. Business fixed investment grew 6.5 per cent in 1996, encouraged by the improved export outlook following the depreciation of the yen in 1996, as well as deregulation measures in some service sectors.
Consumer spending has lagged overall gross domestic product (GDP) growth, however, reflecting concerns about the still-weak labour market. Also, net exports were weak, this being a lagged effect of the yen's appreciation in 1995.
There are concerns about the sustainability of Japan's growth in 1997 and beyond. More than 80 per cent of the growth in 1996 resulted from the jump in GDP in the first quarter, reflecting the massive government spending programme; during the rest of the year, when public investment slowed considerably, the economy grew at a more modest rate (see table 11.1). Moreover, a sharp decrease in public investment is envisaged in the Government's public spending plans as outlined in the 1997-1998 budget. This budget aims to shrink the general government deficit to below 3 per cent. The major question, therefore, is whether private expenditure will replace the smaller public spending.
In fact, private consumption growth in Japan is forecast to slow down in the second quarter of 1997. The consumption tax rate was raised in April and special income tax exemptions were terminated. On the other hand, private investment and the external sector will likely sustain relatively strong growth as long as the yen-dollar exchange rate remains close to its range in the first quarter of 1997.
The net effect of these various factors is an expansion of output of less than 2 per cent in 1997. This is not sufficient to improve the labour market, especially in the face of structural factors. One of these has been a rise in labour mismatch: that is to say, an increase in the number of labour-market participants who do not possess the skills companies are looking for.
The continental Western European economies appear to have entered a recovery phase again after a severe weakening of activity in the second half of 1995 and early 1996 (see table 11.1). The stimuli coming from less stringent monetary policy and strong external demand are likely to outweigh the negative effects of tight fiscal policies. Nevertheless, output is not expected to grow strongly enough to make any significant dent in the high levels of unemployment.
Thus far, the German recovery has been export-led. Business investment, which had played a key role in previous recoveries, fell in 1996 and was concentrated mainly on rationalization and replacement rather than capacity expansion. In 1997, business investment in machinery and equipment, as well as in structures, is expected to remain weak as capacity utilization rates will not reach normal levels before 1998. Private consumption may post only modest gains, reflecting near-zero growth in incomes and a high degree of uncertainty over job security. Overall, projected growth will be too weak to reduce unemployment which is likely to remain near a post-war high in 1997-1998.
Since reunification, large public expenditures and improved productivity boosted output in the eastern part of the country and raised the economic growth of Germany as a whole. These regional stimuli are declining in importance, and growth in the eastern part of the country has been converging towards the lower rate of the western part.
After the 1995 slowdown, French economic activity strengthened in the course of 1996 and some further acceleration seems likely in 1997. Exports and investment are expected to be the main engines of growth. There is a need to modernize and restore productive capacities following the sharp decline in investment that occurred in the early 1990s. Consumer spending is likely to lag behind overall GDP owing to the still-depressed level of consumer confidence, and wage moderation in the context of high unemployment, as well as increased tax and social insurance contributions.
The 1996 economic slowdown hit Italy especially hard. With tight monetary policy aimed at fighting inflation, which was considerably above the European Union average, the lira appreciated in 1996. On top of the contractionary effect of these monetary and exchange-rate factors, the Government took an exceptionally austere fiscal stance, designed to ensure that Italy would meet the Maastricht target for the budget deficit. The bright spot, and indeed the objective of the Government's tight policies, has been falling inflation which, for the first time since 1969, sank well below 3.0 per cent at an annual rate by the end of 1996. In the light of the improved inflation outlook, market interest rates have fallen. However, restrained consumer demand, because of the continued weakness in the labour market and the tight fiscal stance, is expected to continue to dampen the recovery in 1997.
The economy of the United Kingdom has entered the sixth year of a cyclical upswing. The expansion is no longer being propelled by exports, owing to sterling's appreciation and the relatively low growth in most other European markets.
Rather, there has been a strong rebound in consumer spending supported by further falls in unemployment, rising real incomes and a modest reduction in taxation. Business investment is expected to accelerate in 1997 despite a rise in interest rates, as profit prospects are considered encouraging.
Macroecononric stances Fiscal discipline, short-term economic fluctuations notwithstanding, characterizes the policy stance in developed countries. Except in Japan, attempts have not been made to spur economic growth through fiscal policy; hence, efforts to navigate economies towards sustainable, non-inflationary growth have become mainly a function of monetary policy.
In the United States, the Federal Reserve has been successful in steering the economy along a path of stable, non-inflationary growth. From July 1995 through January 1996, when it judged that the economy was decelerating too quickly, it lowered its key short-term interest rate, the federal funds rate, 0.75 percentage points in steps to 5.25 per cent. The low-inflation environment allowed the Federal Reserve the virtually unprecedented option of relaxing monetary policy during a period in which a recession was neither present nor foreseen, On 25 March 1997, the Federal Reserve decided to raise this rate to 5.5 per cent, as the economy had been growing at a very strong pace in the preceding six months. The move was clearly pre-emptive, as there were very few signs of pressure on prices.
The Canadian economy has entered the fourth year of a fiscal austerity that has been more severe than the much-discussed fiscal consolidation in Europe (see table A.S). This deficit reduction has been achieved mainly through spending cutbacks, Canada's debt-to-GDP ratio is expected to start falling in 1998 for the first time since the mid-1970s. The improved inflation outlook in Canada allowed the Bank of Canada to reduce its bank rate 19 times in 21 months to 3.25 per cent by the end of December 1996, taking the country's interest rates to 40-year lows. The increase in United States interest rates in March 1997 widened the already large gap between United States and Canadian interest rates, and put downward pressure on the Canadian dollar. In these circumstances, it is difficult to foresee any further fall in Canadian interest rates.
In Japan, the Government perceives an urgent need to reduce fiscal deficits because of the sharp increase in the public debt. As discussed in chapter VI, the future obligations of the Government to finance social security payments are mounting and, unless changes are made, Japan will be faced with severe imbalances in its public finances. The Government is discussing eliminating the need for deficit-financing bonds by the year 2003 and, at the same time, preventing the ratio of taxes to GDP from rising to 50 per cent, which it would have to do in the absence of major changes in expenditure policy. One possible step would be to extend the duration of the lO-year public investment plan. The Government might also impose a cap on, or even reduce, total expenditures. It intends to prioritize all the major expenditure items according to policy goals and cost-effectiveness.
This would be an important departure from the traditional budgeting practice of changing expenditure on all items proportionately.
Given the present economic slack, the official discount rate in Japan is likely to remain at the historically low level of 0.5 per cent for some time. Low interest rates are crucial for the economy's recovery. They not only stimulate private investment, but also encourage private investors to buy foreign securities.
This should help to counter upward pressures on the yen when the Japanese current account surplus starts increasing again.
Much of the bleak performance of the Japanese economy in recent years has been due to structural weaknesses, some of which were dramatically revealed by the bursting of the speculative financial bubble at the start of the decade.
Others pertain to many detailed economic regulations, some of which have outlived their usefulness. The Government's ability to push forward deregulation of industries, such as banking, insurance and telecommunications is crucial for long-term economic growth. Also, given the fact that Japanese banks hold bad debts that total more than 5 per cent of GDP, the Government has sought to ease the burden through the direct purchase of real estate and the creation of securitization schemes for loans backed by real estate.
In many European countries, economic policy making has been dominated by the attempt to meet the budgetary criteria under the Maastricht Treaty while not undermining the recovery. Indeed, if growth falters, it will be close to impossible for many countries to reach the targets by the end of 1997. In some cases, the budgetary criteria are likely to be met with a less tight fiscal policy than a year ago. In Italy, however, additional spending cuts and new taxes, equivalent to almost 4 per cent of GDP, were imposed in the 1997 regular and supplementary budgets.
While the fiscal stance remains tight in Europe, monetary conditions have been eased considerably over 1995 and 1996, amid slow growth and falling inflation - itself partly the consequence of fiscal austerity. The lower interest rates that resulted will help reduce debt-service costs and hence assist in the push to reach the Maastricht targets. With strengthening economic activity in 1997, however, the chances of further cuts in these low rates of interest appear to be small.
While central banks and finance ministries largely determine very short run interest rates, movements in long-term interest rates are more market-determined and reflect the market's estimation of the direction of key variables, such as future inflation and exchange-rate movements. In the context of the approach leading to Economic and Monetary Union, there has been a marked convergence in long-term interest rates across countries (see figure II.2).
Since 1995, there has been a narrowing of the difference from German rates in the cases of Italy, Portugal and Spain. The yield differential between French and German bonds was eliminated in 1997.
In the United Kingdom, the monetary authorities decided to begin raising rates pre-emptively in order to moderate the economic upswing and prevent inflation from moving above its target rate of 2.5 per cent. On 30 October 1996, the Bank of England raised the base lending rate by a quarter point to 6.0 per cent, in the first tightening of monetary policy in 20 months. Thus far in the present six-year recovery (the first recovery of its kind in the post-war period), GDP has grown at a moderate, but steady, sustainable and non-inflationary rate. Given a moderately tight budget for the 1997 fiscal year, as well as sterling's considerable strengthening, the current round of monetary tightening is not likely to be stringent.
In Australia, the major focus of macroeconomic policy is to balance the budget in three years. However, in response to a pronounced slowdown in growth, declining inflation pressures and still-high unemployment rates, the Government has relaxed monetary policy by lowering the official cash rate in three steps from 7.5 to 6.0 per cent since July 1996.
In New Zealand, in contrast, both monetary policy and fiscal policy remained tight in 1996, in spite of the fact that they had already slowed the strong growth of 1993-1994. Even though the fiscal stance may become slightly more expansionary in 1997, the budget will remain in surplus.
In the developed countries, the rewards of fiscal consolidation have been seen in the form of lower interest and inflation rates. For the longer term, much will depend on whether countries can build on their fiscal achievements to attain faster, job-creating growth. It is increasingly realized that structural factors must be tackled to ensure that such growth takes place.
The attention being paid by Japan to deregulation offers an example of a structural difficulty being tackled. In Europe, now that their exertions to meet the Maastricht criteria are reaching fruition, countries are increasingly turuing to structural policy concerns, chiefly social security, health, education, including the training of labour, and rigidities in the labour and product markets. For instance, in Spain, business leaders and labour leaders reached a national agreement in April 1997 whereby the former accepted a new system of four-year renewable employment contracts for first-time job-seekers and for the long-term unemployed, while the latter agreed to lower compensation in cases of unfair dismissal.
These new measures were expected to increase employment opportunities. In Germany, the political process is engaged in tax and welfare reform. A Belgian scheme to reduce the social security contributions of companies who employed manual workers was approved by the European Commission in March 1997. The lower social security contributions for employers were expected to encourage them to make job offers to manual workers and thus to cut unemployment.
The year 1996 saw a further contraction of output in the transition economies as a group (see table A.3). However, 1997 could be a more promising year. This might appear paradoxical in view of the setbacks and difficulties that many encountered in 1996. Yet, there have been important policy developments in several countries in 1996 and early 1997 that offer the promise that, at the end of the year, these economies will be more firmly positioned, with the development of more effective market institutions, to move to a growth path that is sustainable in the longer run.
Overall, it is expected that 1997 might see the first increase in output in the region as a whole since 1989, with the Central and Eastern European transition economies (CEETEs), the Baltic States and the countries of CIS all registering growth (see table A.3). Yet this output revival must be seen in the context of the earlier drastic declines in output: with respect to the CEETEs, only in Poland is output in 1997 expected to surpass its level in 1989' (see figure II.3). The measured declines in output have been even more severe in CIS and the Baltic States; for example, 1997 output in the Russian Federation and that in Ukraine are expected to still be more than 40 per cent and 60 per cent respectively below their levels of 1989.
Moreover, the resumption of output growth need not be the same thing as the reduction in unemployment. The total number of registered unemployed in the transition economies was 14.4 million at the end of 1996, 370,000 more than a year before." While the unemployment level in the CEETEs and the Baltic States declined from 7.5 million in March 1994 to 6.1 million in December 1996, the unemployment rates in these countries are still high, averaging about II per cent. In CIS, the rate of unemployment is lower, averaging 6.4 per cent, with the recorded rates varying between about 1 per cent in Azerbaijan and nearly 10 per cent in Armenia.
Given the scale of the measured output contraction since the transition began, even these rates of unemployment must signify either serious overmanning or under-reporting of output. However, retaining workers in employment has been one way of continuing to provide them with social services, including housing.
This practice cannot be continued indefinitely in the new economic environment in these countries, which makes the transition to strong growth ultimately essential.
One of the conditions for the sustained revival of economic activity has been the achievement of macroeconomic stabilization. The progress achieved in 1996 can be seen in the decline in inflation, with rates in 1996 having fallen sharply below those of the preceding three years (see table II.2). The most spectacular progress against inflation was achieved in the CIS countries, Croatia and Yugoslavia, which had seen hyperinflation rates of over 1,000 per cent in the early 1990s. Such rates had rendered rational economic decision making virtually impossible. B
In Central and Eastern Europe, with the exception of Hungary, domestic demand provided the main impetus to economic growth in 1996. Private consumption has been picking up in the region, partly as a result of real wage increases. The contribution of the foreign sector to growth was generally nega dimensions economic !l!r(.wt.h tive, as the volume of imports, often of investment goods, but also of consumer goods, grew more rapidly than thaI of exports. With strong foreign capital inflows, there had been an appreciation of exchange rates which was, however, a major factor in controlling inflation.
The strong economic performance of Poland, the country with the largest population of the CEETEs, reflected its progress towards building a modern economy. Poland has seen an acceleration in investment growth in every year since 1992 (see table A.lO), The distribution of output is changing: the share of services rose from 35 per cent in 1991 to 52 per cent in 1996, that of industry and construction fell from 52 to 39 per cent and that of agriculture from 13 to 8 per cent. Domestic demand in Poland was encouraged by a sharp expansion in domestic credit, both to households and to businesses: total credits to businesses grew by 14 per cent in real terms and to households by 76 per cent; spending on cars and computers doubled in 1995-1996.
In Hungary, the stabilization package introduced in March 1995 was continued into 1996. This had the intended results: aggregate growth was weak but outright recession was avoided. The strong growth in exports and weak growth in imports, brought about not just by the currency's depreciation, but also by an import surcharge, helped to shrink Hungary's current account deficit from $3.9 billion in 1994 to $2.5 billion in 1995 and $1.7 billion in 1996. Fiscal austerity led to a fall in public consumption in 1996. A restrictive incomes policy brought about a decline in real wages for the second year running. The package appears to have laid the foundation for an improved economic performance.
In April 1997, the Czech Republic began a major macroeconomic policy adjustment, as the current account and fiscal deficits had widened appreciably.
One of the underlying reasons for those imbalances has been that productivity did not grow as rapidly as real income for several years. Enterprises had received ample financing from majority state-owned banks and structural reorganization was not a high priority since export deliveries and domestic demand had grown strongly. With the appreciation of the currency as a result of financial inflows that were attracted by high interest rates - themselves associated with a tight monetary policy - exports fell after the second quarter of 1996 and industrial production slumped. This reduced tax revenues, contributing to the fiscal imbalance.
The April 1997 package included measures to cut imports and hold government spending below budget projections, including those for wages. 9 The fiscal tightening was accompanied by monetary easing: the minimum reserve requirements for banks were cut from n.5 to 9.5 per cent of deposits. The Government also announced its intention to undertake institutional reforms: to speed up the privatization of banks and companies, to crack down on tax evasion and corruption, and to set up an independent watchdog to police the Prague stock exchange.
Of the countries that were formerly part of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, Croatia and Slovenia registered strong rates of growth in 1996 and an acceleration in 1997 is anticipated (see table A.3). In both countries, the revival of tourism was an important source of renewed economic vigour. The former' Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia continued the stabilization exercise launched in early 1995, with substantial success. Inflation is estimated to have declined in 1996 to about the lowest rate among the transition economies. An acceleration in growth is expected for 1997.
Bosnia's economy grew by about 40 per cent in 1996, but GDP was nevertheless only one third of its pre-war level. It is estimated that in the territory of the Muslim-Croat Federation in Bosnia, industrial output recovered to 85 per cent of its pre-war level. Economic growth in the area of the Republika Srpska (Serb Republic) was close to zero; wages are one third of the level in the Federation and inflation is high. The unemployment rate in Bosnia as a whole fell to some 50-60 percent of the labour force from its worst point, 90 per cent.
About 200,000 jobs were created through international reconstruction assistance.
Foreign trade turnover increased briskly and prices have been stabilized.
The European Union-World Bank donor conferences in December 1995 and April 1996 raised $1.8 billion but Bosnia is finding it difficult to fulfil the conditions set by the multilateral organizations.
Of the three Baltic States, Estonia has had the most consistent GDP growth (see table A.3). Reliance on re-exports of Russian oil, metals and raw materials as the principal vehicle of economic activity in the early days of the transition has been replaced by the recovery of indigenous manufacturing and, in particular, the service sector. A rapid and extensive privatization programme, the strict financial discipline of a currency board and a highly liberal trading regime provided a foundation for a rapid economic transformation. The country's financial sector is strong, with robust credit growth and with the banks having a bad debt ratio of less than 5 per cent.
Latvia seems poised for an acceleration of growth in 1997, owing to the reduction of interest rates as a result of fiscal consolidation, the strengthening of the banking system in the aftermath of the 1995 crisis and a continuation of the privatization process. Lithuania appears to be continuing on a gradually accelerating growth trend.
With small domestic markets and a very limited resource base, in particular, for energy, the foreign economic ties of all the Baltic States remain critically important. At present, a significant share of GDP, in particular in Latvia (22 per cent in 1996), is tied to transit fees, primarily for Russian exports. The long-term sustainability of economic growth could be significantly enhanced by the further development and diversification of the range of products and services that the three economies provided competitively.
Output fell 6 per cent in the Russian Federation on an officially reported basis in 1996. However, other data suggest that the actual decline may be overstated by the GDP data, owing to their limited coverage of the "shadow" economy (see the introduction to the statistical annex below). In particular, reported disposable household income in 1996 was about the same as a year earlier and the reported share of the population with monetary incomes below the subsistence level fell to 22 per cent compared with 25 per cent in 1995. In addition, in January 1997, Goskomstat, the State Statistical Committee, revised its methodology and increased its estimate of unregistered economic activity from 20 to 23 per cent of officially reported GDP.
Despite these caveats about data quality, the evidence shows that a major contributor to the Russian Federation's continuing economic decline was the factor of gross fixed investment, reported to have contracted by 18 per cent, even more than in 1995 (see table A.lO). The decline was particularly steep in manufacturing, especially in the sectors serving consumer demand (light industry and building materials) as well as in agriculture (where investment fell by 31 per cent). At the same time, investment in energy and industrial infrastructure is stable and, in some sectors, is even growing.
One principal source of the disappointing performance of the Russian economy, especially with respect to investment, was the dampening effect of political instability. Since 1995, the principal obstacle to the normalization of economic activity and resumption of economic growth has been the inconsistent, unpredictable and excessively discretionary regulatory, legal and administrative environment. Contrary to expectations, political uncertainty did not end with the mid-year re-election of the President, but continued through the winter.
As a result, the non-state sector did not redirect its financial resources from financial speculation to investment in the real economy.
Such was the lack of confidence in the currency and in the banking system that individuals preferred to hold much of their savings in the form of foreign currency rather than deposit them in the domestic banking system, and this development continued into early 1997. Funds that were deposited with domestic banks were not used to extend the kind of medium-term credit needed for investment. The tight monetary policy required to control inflation resulted in a very high yield on short-term (mostly three-month) treasury bills.
With such returns being available on Government paper, there was little incentive for banks to extend credit to industry.
In 1995, only two CIS countries had expanding economies, Armenia and Georgia, the output of both having suffered an earlier, nearly catastrophic collapse.
In 1996, both countries continued to enjoy strong rates of recovery, while their Governments' efforts to implement strict monetary and fiscal policies had resulted in a sharp fall in inflation.
Growth also resumed in other CIS countries in 1996 (see table A.3). In Kazakstan, for example, demand was buoyed by an increase in foreign direct investment that helped bring about a recovery in the extractive sector. Tough fiscal and monetary policies brought inflation down to around 1 per cent a month by early autumn, and the budget deficit was kept under 3 per cent of GDP. In Kyrgyzstan, investment showed spectacular increases in 1995 and 1996, abetted by inflows of foreign direct investment and international credits.
The budget deficit was cut from over 15 per cent of GDP in 1995 to around 6 per cent in 1996. In contrast to many other CIS economies, this was achieved by slashing government expenditure, not by trying to increase budget revenues.
Yet the social situation is dire, with over half of the population reported to be living below the official poverty level, with real wages falling and with unemployment growing. In the Republic of Moldova and Ukraine, output continued to decline in 1996. Hostilities in Tajikistan have resulted in a suppression of output and have continued to discourage the exploitation of its rich mineral deposits.
Transition is a long process that involves many elements - opening of enterprises and households to market processes, including liberalization of trade policy; "corporatization" and a consistent privatization policy; and fiscal and monetary discipline; as well as fostering of those elements of civil society that were missing under the previous system. These include such practices of "good governance" as ensuring an honest and competent civil service, a transparent and fair tax structure, clearly defined property rights, courts that operate impartially and that enforce these and other rights, stable and transparent regulations, and measures to effectively combat corruption. In addition, transition economies have needed to develop bankruptcy proceedings, prudent management practices for banking institutions, pension, health-care and unemployment systems that do not impose an excessive burden on public finances, data-collection agencies, and non-governmental organizations such as trade unions, management groups and private foundations.
This much has been understood for some time and many Governments have actively sought to move along such a policy reform path for several years. Others have opted to follow such a path more recently. Bulgaria, Romania and Ukraine, in pmticular, are three countries making strong efforts to break with their past record of hesitation and ambivalence in economic and structural reform.
As of the beginning of 1996, Bulgaria had not reformed its state-owned industries through privatization, restructuring or closure: the state-owned sector still contributed 85 per cent of industrial output and was incurring heavy losses as a result of a lack of managerial accountability. The banking sector was also largely unreformed. With lending to state and privately owned enterprises mounting, in late 1995 some banks experienced liquidity problems when, as a result of rising inflation, the authorities had sought to restrict credit, and the banks to obtain payments from their borrowers. By mid-1996, the difficulties in the banking sector had turned into a full-scale run on the banks by the public. Several commercial banks were closed, the activities of others were suspended and 15 were placed under supervision. Effective real interest rates reached very high levels and credit activity came to a virtual halt. Businesses could only rely on internally generated funds to finance their operations, and business activity sank precipitously.
In the face of the economic crisis, in March 1997, the Bulgarian Government introduced a new economic stabilization programme. The Government's plans included a rapid privatization of state banks and industries through cash sales to foreign interests, with the proceeds from the sales being transferred to the budget in a transparent manner. The deadline for completing the privatization is December 1998. The Government also introduced a currency board to fix the exchange rate and deprive the Central Bank of the power to finance the budget deficit or the banking system through issuance of money. In 1996, the budget deficit was estimated at 11 per cent of GDP and almost all of it had been monetized.
In Romania, significant components of initial liberalization programmes had been taken back after 1991: prices were still controlled and investment by state-owned enterprises was distorted by subsidies and credits from the stateowned banks. A new Government came into office in November 1996 and in mid-February 1997 it unveiled an austere and comprehensive economic programme.
The key elements included price liberalization, liberalization of the foreign exchange market, reductions in tariffs on agricultural goods, reduction of the consolidated budget deficit, and the elimination of hidden subsidies and of National Bank direct credits. Most prices, including the exchange rate, were liberalized on 18 February 1997. Also, to discourage short-term speculative inflows, the Government imposed a 28 per cent capital gains tax on foreign portfolio investments held less than a year (compared with 18 per cent on those held more than a year).
Major actions were initiated to accelerate privatization, restructure or close state-owned enterprises and reform the agricultural sector. A total of 3,600 enterprises are to be privatized by the end of 1997, including the six largest commercial banks. The companies will be offered to the highest bidder without a minimum price, with therebeing equal access and treatment for all potential buyers, local or foreign. Also, foreign ownership of land is allowed.
In Ukraine, the authorities took major steps in 1996 towards deep economic reform. Implementation of a strict monetary and fiscal policy resulted in a dramatic decrease in inflation. Foreign reserves benefited from an increase in exports, inflow of foreign capital, and resumption of a standby programme with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in May 1996. This permitted the Government to introduce a full-fledged national currency, the hryvnya. This step was viewed in the country both as a milestone and as an important component in Ukraine's economic transformation.
Given the difficulties of the starting points, in none of these three countries is output expected to respond to the new policy departures this year. In the Russian Federation, however, where strong policy measures have been taken at various points since 1992, albeit often not sustained (see chap. VII), 1997 may finally be the year in which reported output again begins to grow.
Developments in the Russian Federation were again inconsistent in 1996.
Private firms that had originated in the private sector (and not as converted state enterprises) accounted for 38 per cent of GDP in 1996, up from 25 per cent in 1994. By the same token, the GDP share of state-owned enterprises fell from 38 to 23 per cent. Also, the consolidated budget deficit for the first 11 months of 1996 fell to 4.1 per cent of GDP and the federal budget deficit fell to 3.3 per cent. However, only 70 per cent of planned revenues were realized and the budget outcome was thus misleading: it was achieved by across-the-board reductions in government outlays and through payment arrears.
A new economic programme was thus outlined by the President of the Russian Federation in his March 1997 State of the Nation address to the Parliament.
This stressed fiscal reform as the key economic task of the year with renewed efforts to raise tax revenues and spend them efficiently on the most socially important programmes. A new tax code was to simplify the tax system and abolish its numerous exemptions. All fiscal payments, both revenues and expenditures, were to be channelled through the Federal Treasury system instead of through commercial channels. All government procurement would be made through the process of open competitive bidding.
The Government's economic programme for 1997 also focused on eliminating the remaining institutional, administrative and regulatory obstacles to the realization of the country's potential for economic growth. Indeed, within a month, the Government made the first steps in two extremely sensitive areas: "natural monopolies" (namely, major energy companies, railroads, electricity grids) and a reform of "communal services" that will entail steep increases of rents and fees for household energy, water and so forth.
The measures in the Government's programme and a new confidence in economic management may enable the Russian Federation's economy to grow at last, albeit modestly, in 1997. Interest rates have already declined substantialy, alongside the fall in inflation and increased confidence in the economy; for example, the yield on treasury bills, which had exceeded 200 per cent in 1996, declined to 30 per cent in March 1997.

Economic growth in developing economies accelerated in 1996 and is expected to rise again in 1997 (see table 11.3). The stronger growth can be seen in Latin America and Western Asia, while Africa appears to be maintaining its recent greater dynamism; and the strong overall growth in Eastern and Southern Asia and China continues but at moderated rates. The least developed countries meanwhile are in their third year of relatively strong growth and rising per capita output. Inflation continued to decline in all developing regions in 1996 and is expected to sustain that trend in 1997 (see figure 11.4).
Africa: economic recovery builds momentum The most significant economic development in Africa is the return to rising GDP per capita in 1996 and its anticipated continuation in 1997. The recovery was rather widely shared, with at least 22 countries reaching a GDP growth rate of 5 per cent or higher12 and 11 reaching a rate of 6 per cent or higher in 1996.13 GDP declined in only 2 countries of the 44 for which estimates were available in 1996 - Burundi and the Central African Republic - and in both cases the decline was associated with political considerations. It appears that 1996-1997 may mark the first time since 1979~1980 that the average GDP per capita of Africa has increased for two consecutive years. Nonetheless, this follows on a protracted decline. A higher and sustained growth rate will be required to alleviate widespread poverty and reduce high unemployment and underemployment. Indeed, if economic growth continues at the current pace it will take more than 10 years just to recover the GDP per capita level of 1980.
The improvement in output growth since 1994 in Africa can be attributed to a number of international and domestic economic developments and improved weather conditions. Some of these factors cannot be expected to continue. In particular, higher commodity prices, particularly during 1994 and 1995, and higher oil prices in 1996 played a critical role. Moreover, favourable weather conditions in 1996 enabled a strong recovery in agricultural output. Africa has also benefited from strength in international demand for African exports, which is expected to be sustained in 1997 and 1998.
Other factors have been of a more lasting nature. Improved and sustained macroeconomic stability and policy reforms which can be discerned in a growing number of countries have created a more conducive environment for investment in some cases and removed obstacles to increasing production in others.
GDP growth in Africa is expected to slow slightly in 1997, as the effect of recovery from drought, which helped fuel growth in 1996, will wear off and the stimulus from strong commodity prices is forecast to diminish further in 1997.
Growing conditions for the 1997 agricultural crops have so far been generally favourable in most regions with the exception of Northern and Eastern Africa.
The forecast also looks towards greater political and social stability, greater internal peace and an end to civil strife and instability which have affected several countries on the African continent.
Growth in the agricultural and mining sectors was the largest contributor to the higher growth rate of GDP of Africa in 1996. Higher agricultural production was particularly important in all countries of Northern Africa and in most countries of Southern Africa where agricultural output recovered from the drought-affected output of 1995. Cereal production alone is expected to have increased by 59 per cent in 1996 in Northern Africa and by 68 per cent in Southern Africa. In Morocco, cereal production increased by more than five times in 1996, fuelling a GDP growth that reached 10 per cent. In the Republic of South Africa as well, the agricultural sector gave the main impetus to GDP growth, taking over from manufacturing as the fastest-growing sector.
In many African countries, increased output of food staples contributed to improved food security, lower food import costs, higher rural incomes and lower inflation. Record grain harvests in Ethiopia for the second consecutive year stimulated growth in other sectors of the economy and eliminated overall food deficits that had plagued the country in recent years.
However, in at least some regions of Cape Verde, Eritrea, Kenya and Somalia, drought in 1996 led to substantially reduced harvests and increased food aid or food import requirements. Emergency food aid shipments were required in Burundi, Rwanda and eastern Zaire as a result of the movements of large numbers of refugees and displaced persons in those countries. Food production declined in parts of Uganda and the Sudan where civil unrest disrupted rural agricultural activity, and in Liberia and Sierra Leone, food production remained below the pre-conflict levels.
Output of minerals and metals increased in such countries as Zaire, Zambia and Zimbabwe, and mining also provided a major impetus to GDP growth in several countries. Higher prices in recent years, new mining codes, with more clearly defined rights and obligations of foreign investors, and aidfinanced geologic surveys contributed to a large increase in the number of explorations for mineral deposits in the last few years and these have had notable success. Gold production in particular has increased rapidly in several countries in Western and Southern Africa (except in the Republic of South Africa). Output of diamonds contributed significantly to the rise of GDP in Botswana and Namibia.
Rising oil prices during the last two years contributed to higher export earnings and government revenues and expenditures and thus to faster economic growth in the oil-producing countries. The GDP growth rate for the fuel-exporting countries increased from almost nil to almost 4 per cent between 1994 and 1996 (see table II.3). Oil production increased in most oil-producing countries in 1996 (except Cameroon). Stronger export earnings allowed higher imports of capital goods and intermediate inputs, easing supply constraints and contributing to higher growth, particularly in those countries, such as Algeria, where foreign exchange shortages had limited growth. Higher oil prices also contributed to the improvement in economic growth in the central part of the Communaute financiere africaine (CFA) franc zone, whose recovery after the CFA franc devaluation of January 1994 has lagged behind that in the western part of the zone.
However, higher oil prices and higher GDP growth were accompanied by rather poor performance particularly in the manufacturing sector, in a number of fuel-producing countries, such as Algeria, Cameroon and Nigeria. In Algeria, industrial production declined in 1996 as a result of import liberalization and tightened credit; and in Nigeria, capacity utilization remained very low in 1996 owing to weak demand and infrastructure problems.
In a few other countries, manufacturing was among the fastest-growing sectors in 1996, but from a small base, and the contribution to GDP growth was therefore still small. Manufacturing production began to recover in Zambia after three years of decline. In Cote d'Ivoire, the manufacturing sector continues to benefit from the devaluation of the CFA franc in January 1994 and exports to other countries in the region especially have increased. Moreover, local capacity for processing of cocoa and production of processed food is expanding in Cote d'Ivoire. Manufacturing output linked to the processing and distribution of agricultural commodities showed strong growth in several other countries as a direct result of the recovery of agriculture and growth in demand for consumer goods boosted by income growth.
A number of countries continued to make considerable headway in establishing macroeconomic stability and reforming economic policies in 1996. The improvement in growth of GDP in the last two years can be partly attributed to these policies (although their impact is hard to quantify).14 This improvement can be seen in a few countries, such as Cote d'Ivoire, Egypt and South Africa, where investment has been a driving force behind the recent recovery and is improving the prospects for sustained economic growth.
Several countries in the region deepened structural reforms in recent years and many accelerated their privatization programmes. Since 1994, Algeria has liberalized domestic prices, the foreign exchange market and trade and has achieved a considerable degree of macroeconomic stability with the support of external finance and debt relief. In Egypt, economic reforms gained momentum with the appointment of a new Government in January 1996 which has accelerated the privatization programme, reduced food subsidies, further liberalized trade, reformed investment legislation and partially removed rent controls. Ethiopia, Kenya, Uganda and Zambia have also made significant gains in their reform efforts.
Unemployment is a primary concern of African Governments. While the labour force has grown rapidly, years of economic stagnation, restructuring of the public sector, privatization and trade liberalization have curtailed formal employment in the private and public sectors. Unemployment rates are particularly high among youth and the educated and national rates reach double digits, inter alia, in Algeria, Morocco, South Africa, Zambia and Zimbabwe. Moreover, the recent economic growth spurt has not yet led to substantial employment growth. South Africa, for example, has over the last few years experienced a nearly "jobless recovery". While GDP growth has been positive since 1993, formal non-agricultural employment has declined every year since 1989 except 1995. The Government aims at creating a substantial number of jobs by the year 2000 through education and skill development, investment in infrastructure and the promotion of labour-market flexibility.
Privatization, as a part of structural reform programmes aimed at improving economic efficiency, has been implemented by an increasing number of countries in Africa. However, the short-term consequence has been the reduction of employment. The Government of Egypt, for example, is concerned about the effect of privatization on employment. The unemployment rate is officially estimated at 9.4 per cent but other sources indicate that it might be substantially higher. Algeria and Morocco face a similar predicament. Algeria is to accelerate its privatization programme in the near future and this is likely to entail considerable loss of employment while unemployment is already high. The privatization programme in Morocco started in early 1993 after the Privatization Law in 1989 mandated the sale of a large number of companies. These companies were selected, however, because they did not have problems of overstaffing (so as to avoid adverse effects on employment). This first phase of privatization is drawing to a close and a second phase might have larger effects on unemployment.
Inflation has been declining since 1995 in many African countries as a result of fiscal consolidation, restrictive monetary policies and good harvests, and the trend is expected to continue in 1997. In the CFA zone, inflation the trend rates fell below double digits in all countries - and in most countries to below 5 per cent - as the jump in prices following the devaluation of the CFA franc in January 1994 petered out. Inflation rates are expected to decline in 1997 to 3-4 per cent. Fiscal and monetary policy has been tightened in Guinea-Bissau, where the inflation rate was 55 per cent in late 1996. It is planning to join the CFA franc zone in May 1997 and is thus aiming to bring its inflation in line with that of the other CFA franc zone members.
In Ghana and Nigeria, inflation has been reduced drastically since 1995. In Nigeria, the annualized monthly rate of inflation dropped from a high of 90 per cent in mid-1995 to 28 per cent at the end of 1996, the lowest rate since the beginning of 1992. This was mainly a result of tight monetary policy and fiscal consolidation. The Government of Nigeria virtually eliminated its large budget deficit in 1995 and reported a budget surplus for 1996, aided by higher oil prices. However, an expansionary budget was announced for 1997. In Ghana, as well, the inflation rate declined steadily from 74 per cent in 1995 to 34 per cent in 1996, mainly as a result of a good food crop, although a restrictive monetary policy also played a role.
Kenya successfully implemented fiscal consolidation policies to contain government spending and budget deficits but rising food prices in 1996, as a result of the drought, and higher fuel import costs, caused inflation to increase from 1 per cent in 1995 to 9 per cent in 1996. Rising costs of imports also led to higher inflation in 1996 in the Sudan and in countries in Southern Africa whose currencies are tied to the depreciated South African rand.
Economic growth in Latin America and the Caribbean is gathering speed, with strong export growth in many countries and with business confidence and foreign capital flows encouraged by the continuity in economic policy displayed since the Mexican crisis. Output in the region is growing at about 4 per cent a year again, after the decline in 1995 (see table 11.3). GDP expanded in 1996 at a rate of 5 per cent or more in seven countries,1. while the pace of the recovery in the countries hit by recession in 1995 (Argentina, Mexico, Uruguay) exceeded most forecasts in the second half of last year. Prospects for growth, however, fall short of the region's trend rate of growth of 5.5 per cent per year between 1945 and 1980. They also are still far from the 6 per cent annual rate deemed necessary to reduce growing unemployment and address urgent social needs.17
At the same time, regional inflation continues its decline towards single digits (see table A.13). Further curbing of inflation remains a priority for the Governments of the region. To this end, fiscal austerity and tight monetary policies prevail. The tendency was relatively uniform, as inflation was lower in 10 countries and stable in 11 others.1s In particular, in Argentina, price rises were, at less than 1 per cent, among the lowest in the world, while in Brazil, they were, at 10 per cent, the lowest since 1950. The main exception to this was Venezuela, where inflation soared to a record of 100 per cent, following price liberalization and a major devaluation as part of the adjustment plan; but even there the rate should drop by at least half in 1997. Inflation will also continue to decline in Chile, Colombia, Mexico and Uruguay, but will rise in Ecuador, amid higher utility prices and import duties.
Buoyant exports and external finance were particularly important in the 1996 turnaround of the economies of Argentina, Mexico and Uruguay and, in the continued strong expansion of Chile, experiencing its thirteenth consecutive year of growth. The recovery in the demand in the first three countries was led by investment, while the rise in consumption was constrained by rising unemployment.
Argentina continues to capitalize on export opportunities, especially to Brazil, resulting from almost full implementation of the Southern Cone Common Market (MERCOSUR) and the appreciation of the Brazilian real. In addition, exports were boosted by favourable international prices for grains and oil.
A further stimulus to the economy came from the return of funds to the banking system and the consequent growth in credit around mid-year, as business confidence strengthened.
Similarly, Mexico's recovery was led by manufactured exports, still benefiting from the devaluation of the peso at the end of 1994. However, real incomes have fallen by one fifth since the devaluation. This explains the unevenness of the rebound, which has increased the gap between the modern export sector whose output has doubled in the last six years, and which accounts today for 30 per cent of total production - and. the still-depressednon~tradablesector.
With investment extending to the construction sector and private consumption gradually joining in the rebound, the year 1997 i:lhouldwitness a strengthening of domestic demand.
Venezuela underwent a major adjustment programme, as noted above, which led to an erosion of real wages and a slump in domestic demand. As a result,
Venezuela was the only large country in the region to experience a recession in 1996, despite the expansion of the oil sector. In the second half of the year, however, the economy started to rebound, supported by unexpectedly strong international oil prices and large-scale capital inflow. This year's expansion, expected to be around 4 per cent, is led by domestic demand, and especially by investment in the oil sector, both by the state oil company and by foreign enterprises.
Measures taken by Brazil's Government to cool down the economy, which had begun to overheat since the introduction of the Real Plan in 1994, dampened its rate of growth between 1995 and 1996. As credit expanded, output recovered gradually in the second half of 1996, driven by demand for consumer durables associated with real wage gains, while investment and exports lagged.
Although labour markets improved slightly in the last quarter, the average unemployment rate for the whole year edged up from 4.6 to 5.4 per cent, reflecting primarily a further large decline in industrial employment. This deteriorating trend, started in 1987, stems from import competition, the squee:z;e of profit margins and technological modernization. In the presence of fairly rigid labour costs, firms shift to increasingly capital-intensive technology. Their investment is predominantly capital-deepening and embodies a search for higher quality through the use of imported intermediate goods. This appears to be affecting mainly less skilled workers and the lower income earners.
In some other countries, economic dynamics are heavily affected by political and security factors. Haiti is a case in point. Violence and unrest continue, fuelled by persistent high levels of unemployment; a rising cost of living and impatience at the slow pace of economic recovery.19 The adoption of economic reforms, including partial privatization ofnine state enterprises, has been delayed by the lack of political consensus, and this has held up the release of a large part of international aid. The lack of private investment, the partial suspension of foreign funding and Haiti's limited absorption capacity led to a deceleration of growth to under 3 per cent in 1996. The economy is not expected to recover in 1997, owing to the failure to launch infrastructure projects, combined with continuing low investor confidence.
Poverty in Latin America and the Caribbean still affects over two fifths of the population - about 200 million people - and is affecting them more than ever before.20 The recent recession in Argentina, Mexico and Venezuela, and the associated rise in unemployment increased the number of households below the poverty line in these countries. However, the recent sharp decline in inflation in Brazil and the strong growth of Peru in 1995 and Chile in 1995 and 1996 have led to a decline in poverty in these economies. In the majority of other countries, poverty remained stable or decreased slightly. In addition, an asymmetry has been observed in the response of unemployment to contractions and expansions in economic activity. A sharp increase in open unemployment followed recent recessions i~ Argentina, Mexico and Venezuela. However, in Chile and Peru it has proved difficult to achieve a larger reduction in unemployment despite their vigorous economic growth in the last few years, as competitive restructuring in modern enterprises favours productivity increases and labour flexibility, with a decline in job creation per unit of output.
Overall, urban unemployment in Latin America, currently at an average of 7-8 per cent, has reached its highest level so far this decade. It remains especially high in Argentina (with the highest level in the region, 17 per cent),
Colombia, Panama, Uruguay and Venezuela, mainly reflecting sluggish job creation.
In contrast, the number of unemployed declined last year in Chile,
Nicaragua and Peru. Moreover, over 40 per cent of urban employment is represented by low productivity, and low wage jobs, and the trend is not showing signs of improvement.
Indeed, an important feature of urban poverty in the region is that it affects not only the large share of workers in low"productivity, informal jobs, but also a high percentage of unskilled labour employed in the formal economy. Because of the low incomes associated with low-skilled job categories, in 7 of the 12 countries examined by a recent ECLAC study,21 between 30 and 50 per cent of salaried workers in such categories in the private sector (excluding microenterprises) live in households with incomes below the poverty line. In terms of combating high unemployment and poverty, crucial factors besides the .level of economic growth and inflation reduction are continuing the effort to increase social expenditure and to find more efficient ways to allocate it.
The ultimate requirement for poverty alleviation and unemployment reduction is sustained economic growth at a strong pace. This entails both high overall investment and savings and strengthened human capital development.
Thus, several countries are increasing efforts to improve education systems to enhance labour skills (Argentina, Colombia, Mexico and, starting from lower spending bases, Bolivia and Paraguay). As to the saving-investment nexus, at 19 per cent of CDP in 1996, saving is at the highest level since 1990; but it is both lower than. the Latin American average in the previous decade and much lower than that of the more dynamic economies of South and East Asia (see table A.ll). However, the rapid rebound offinancial flows after the 1995 crisis is a vote of confidence in both growth prospects for the region and the continued commitment to economic reform.
A sound and efficient financial system is another condition for sustained economic growth. The Mexican crisis revealed the fragility of several banking sectors in Latin America and that there is a need for better supervision and regulation of the recently liberalized industry in order to cope with the world's everincreasing financial integration.22 In Argentina, Brazil, Mexico and Venezuela, measures have been taken ~ often with the help of international financial institutions, to this end, but strengthening supervision will take time.
While economic reforms implemented in the 1990s have placed much of the region in a stronger macroeconomic position and have set in motion the structural transformation of the economies of the region, the slow realization of a "reform dividend" is making voters increasingly sceptical of the rationale behind these policies. So far, attempts at addressing social needs have had limited results, and reforms have yet to deliver concrete benefits to the general population. Continued popular support for current economic strategies is not unconditional and dissatisfaction is beginning to build.
Southern Asia While continuing the phenomenon of sustained rapid economic expansion, growth in the Eastern and Southern Asia region decelerated in 1996 owing to the slowdown in the rapidly growing countries (Indonesia, Republic of Korea,
Malaysia, Singapore and Thailand). The regional rate of economic growth is expected to continue in 1997 at about the same rate for similar reasons; More restrictive monetary policy reined in economic expansion in these countries in order to bring about more sustainable growth. In addition, export growth weakened more than expected in the second half of the year owing to a substantial slowdown in world trade, and the cyclical downturn in international demand for semiconductor and information technology products, as well as the appreciation of the dollar against the yen.
Structural problems of differing severities in individual economiesaccentuated the slowdown. The long-term decline of competitiveness of traditional exports threatens sustained high export growth in a number of economies. In addition, in the Republic of Korea and Thailand in particular the fragility of the financial system has become a serious concern. Indeed, these are the main reasons that the return to very high growth rates is not expected this year.
Although at significantly different levels of development, both the Republic of Korea and Thailand have a weak system of regulation and supervision and poor risk management in the financial sector, which have resulted in a high level of bad debts and the collapse of major financial institutions since returns to investment plummeted during the economic downturn in 1996. The central banks have increased liquidity to limit the repercussions but domestic investment can be expected to be restrained by a credit squeeze and weakened investor confidence.
Two consecutive years of slower growth have raised the question of whether this is a temporary setback or a longer-term trend. The situation has highlighted the importance of continued technological upgrading of production and economic reform, particularly of financial institutions, in sustaining rapid growth.
Sustained high growth will depend on a continued high rate of investment in human as well as physical capital and the ability to assimilate technological and managerial expertise from more advanced countries. 23
The economies of Hong Kong and Taiwan Province of China are expected to continue recent growth trends in 1997, with GDP rising 5.5 per cent and 6.3 per cent, respectively. They will benefit from the recovery of world trade and, in the case of Taiwan Province of China, the upturn in international demand for semiconductors and information-technology products. The strengthening of exports and imports of China can be expected to provide added impetus to both economies. Investor confidence and private investment are expected to remain strong in Hong Kong as major public investment projects wind down. Domestic demand in Taiwan Province of China is forecast to strengthen as monetary policy is relaxed and previously postponed public investment projects are pushed forward.
In some countries that had begun to achieve higher growth only in recent years, economic expansion continued to accelerate (Philippines) or remained at a high level (Viet Nam) in 1996. In India as well, economic growth was at a high level in 1996 after several years of acceleration. Domestic and foreign investment growth in the Philippines was robust, benefiting from a stable macroeconomic environment and the results of liberalization and economic reform. A record inflow of capital boosted liquidity and lowered interest rates while generating a boom in financial services. The strong recovery of agricultural production from the natural calamities of the previous year also boosted output. Viet Nam's economic growth was 9.3 per cent in 1996, maintaining a trend of rapid growth which began in 1992. However, the country faces the challenge of holding inflation and the external deficit to sustainable levels.
Strong agricultural and industrial production supported the expansion last year, with particularly robust growth in the still-small non-state manufacturing sector. Export growth was buoyed by oil exports and a record volume of rice exports, made possible by successive good harvests; but with an even higher rate of growth of imports, the external deficit was unsustainably large.
The budget for the 1997 fiscal year has buoyed the economic outlook for India. Although the budget did not put forward a big push in the pace of economic reform, its emphasis on economic growth with social justice and the affirmation of the new Government's support for continued economic liberalization were clear. The proposed policy measures pay special attention to increasing incentives for savings and investment, through reduction of taxes on mass consumer goods and of corporate and personal tax rates, while broadening the tax base. The still-large budget deficit (5 per cent of GDP in 1996) is targeted to be lowered even as social expenditures are increased, based on an anticipated increase in tax revenues from a widened tax base, improved compliance and strong economic growth. New liberalization measures will be implemented in the infrastructure sector to foster domestic and foreign private investment to alleviate existing bottlenecks.
Other major Southern Asian economies have been seeking to improve macroeconomic stability and implement economic reform in order to sustain economic growth. In Pakistan, civil unrest and industrial strikes in response to austere policies to reduce fiscal deficits adversely affected industrial output in 1996. The Government's attempts at reducing the domestic and external deficits had limited effect and inflation remained above 10 per cent. More recently, the newly elected Government indicated its commitment to launching a programme of stabilization and structural reform. Thus, the economic outlook for 1997 remains uncertain. In Bangladesh, strong agricultural production sustained GDP growth of 5 per cent in 1996, while garment exports were depressed by the worldwide slowdown in demand, and private and public investment was weak. In addition, industrial production was disrupted by civil unrest and input shortages.
Gains were made in lowering inflation in a large number of countries in the region in 1996, owing to more moderate growth, aided by improved food supplies.
This level of inflation is expected to be maintained overall, although stronger economic growth and large capital inflows pose risks to inflation in some countries.

China's economy has been achieving the "soft landing" objective of the macroeconomic stabilization policies initiated in 1993. The rate of consumer price inflation, which had reached 24 per cent in 1994, declined to 17 per cent in 1995, and was reduced further to 8.3 per cent in 1996. Meanwhile, the GDP growth rate moderated to 9.7 per cent in 1996, from 10.5 per cent in 1995 and 12.6 per cent in 1994. The high growth of fixed investment, which was the main impetus to rapid growth of demand and rising inflation, was successfully slowed. While investment grew at 18 per cent in 1996; about the same rate as in 1995, this was much lower than the annual average of the period 1991-1995 (about 34 per cent). Consumer spending continued to be strong, with retail sales rising by over 19 per cent.
A persistent tight monetary policy restricting credit was the main instrument employed to restrain growth. It was accompanied by other more direct measures including postponement or cancellation of public investment projects, stricter enforcement of credit ceilings and reinstitution of government control over certain prices. The Government also delayed price decontrols in some areas, which could have resulted in higher prices. This combination of policies succeeded in containing investment growth and alleviating price pres~ sures without seriously dampening consumer demand.
Good harvests also aided the government effort at reducing inflation.
Despite floods in large areas of the country, total grain output reached 480 million metric tons in 1996, representing a rise of more than 3 per cent over 1995.
This performance was partly in response to a 30 per cent increase in government purchase prices of grains, effective mid-1996, which encouraged greater sown acreage for the fall and winter crops.
Industrial output rose almost 13 per cent on the dynamism of the non-state sector. State-owned industrial enterprises are placing ever heavier financial burdens on the Government. About half of them incurred losses in 1996 and the total amount of losses increased by, over 38 per cent. Improving efficiency in this sector remains a priority and, currently, the Government is experimenting with converting them into shareholding companies, and selling their shares in the growing stock market.
The main obstacle to applying market-based rules to medium- and largesized state enterprises has been the potential rise in unemployment. Survey reports have indicated that managers consider roughly 20 per cent of employees in these enterprises to be redundant labour.24 Officially registered unem~ ployment in urban areas rose to 3 per cent in 1996. However, if the unemployed among migrant workers in major cities who are not included in official statistics were taken into account, the rate of urban unemployment would be much higher. Decollectivization of agricultural production since 1978 has freed large number of workers from agriculture. An estimated no million are estimated to be excess workers out of a rural labour force of 450 million. 
This has been a source of rural-urban migration and has made urban employment creation an especial concern.
The pace of reform has accelerated in the external and financial sectors.
The national currency became freely convertible for all current account transactions as of 1 December 1996. Foreign-funded business was granted equal status and legal rights as national enterprises, while tax and other incentives available only to foreign-invested firms are being phased out. In the financial sector, reforms aim to strengthen the Government's capacity in indirect macroeconomic management. An interbank market for funds was established and the central bank started open-market operations.
Prospects for 1997 are for continued strong economic growth of 10 per cent with a relatively low rate of inflation, although employment concerns remain.
The international environment will be conducive to a continued high rate of economic growth in China, with stronger expansion in the economies of China's main trade partners such as Japan and some of the Asian newly industrializing economies. Reforms in currency and foreign investment regulations can also be expected to sustain capital inflows, which included over $42 billion of foreign direct investment in 1996.
Western Asia: the henefits strong oil Economic output in the Western Asia region strengthened significantly in 1996, reflecting strong growth in the member countries of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCCr, owing primarily to the sharp rise in oil prices. After nearstagnation in 1994, output growth has been accelerating and the region's GDP per capita growth rose in 1996 for the first time since 1992. Economic growth in the region is expected to accelerate to about 6 per cent in 1997, reflecting a strong recovery in economic activity in Iraq. GDP growth in the other fuelexporting countries will moderate as oil prices ease.
The rate of economic growth will continue to depend to a large extent on international oil prices and oil revenues, the extent of economic reforms, diversification of the economy, and regional economic integration. The private sector is expected to contribute more to economic activity as a result of new policies aimed at encouraging privatization. More accommodative fiscal policy and more robust productivity in the non-oil sector will also contribute to sustaining growth of GDP. Progress in the Middle East peace process would assist economic growth by encouraging the interregional flow of trade and foreign investment, particularly in Israel, in Jordan, and in the West Bank and Gaza.
The rise in oil prices in 1996 helped reduce fiscal and external imbalances and led to a marked improvement in the current account balances of most oilexporting countries. However, the continued implementation of economic reform and fiscal consolidation in the oil-exporting countries appears to have begun to lose momentum as a result of the large increase in government oil revenues.27
The increase in oil prices in 1996 provided the fuel-exporting countries with much-needed government revenues to service debt (this was the case for Saudi Arabia and the Islamic Republic of Iran) and ease the consolidation of public spending, while at the same time improving their fiscal imbalances. Improvements in the fiscal balances have also been helped by the reform policies adopted since 1994, for example, in Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates.
In Iraq, the United Nations economic sanctions, in effect since 1990, have exacerbated the country's economic and social problems and impeded regional trade and financial flows. However, economic growth is expected to improve in 1997 as a result of the implementation of Security Council resolution 986 (1995), in which the Council allowed Iraq to export $2 billion worth of oil every six months.
In the fuel-importing countries, economic activity decelerated slightly in 1996. Growth of economic activity in Jordan, albeit slower, was still occurring at a rate of 5 per cent. Inflation remained low despite a rise in subsidized prices of some essential items, such as bread. Output is expected to grow by 6 per cent in 1997, particularly since Iraq has begun to export oil, thereby producing a situation that is expected to result in trade benefits for Jordan. In Lebanon, GDP growth fell to 3 per cent in 1996, owing mainly to a slowdown in public and private investment earlier in the year. Reconstruction and rehabilitation efforts were disrupted by renewed military conflict in early 1996, but have bounced back since then and 5 per cent GDP growth is expected in 1997.
In Israel, economic growth fell sharply from an average of 6 per cent per annum in 1990-1995 to 3.8 per cent in 1996, owing to a tighter fiscal policy to control inflation and reduce the external deficit, and a slowdown in investment due to concerns over the peace process. The economy is expected to weaken further in 1997, as fiscal and monetary policies remain tight and receipts from tourism low. Such developments are expected to push up the rate of unemployment.
The economy in the West Bank and Gaza suffered a drastic slowdown and unemployment soared largely as a result of Israel's closures of the Palestinian territories. Prospects for the economy remain highly dependent on the peace process and on the remittances of the 50,000 Palestinians working in Israel, as well as on foreign financial assistance.
Turkey enjoyed a marked expansion of output for the second consecutive year, following a sharp contraction in 1994 in the aftermath of fiscal and monetary tightening, which saw real interest rates reach 40 per cent. Growth in GDP is estimated to have reached 7 per cent in 1996. The budget deficit had been reduced considerably in 1994 and 1995, mainly through cuts in spending and subsidies and an increase in taxes. However, a recent 50 per cent wage increase for state workers and pensioners has added to the budget deficit, which amounted to about 8 per cent of gross national product (GNP) in 1996.
A new economic package presented to the legislature in 1996 focused on raising revenues through the sale of state properties. Economic growth is expected to fall below 5 per cent in 1997, however, reflecting the expectation that little progress will be made to reduce the growing public-sector imbalance, which is contributing to high real interest rates. Inflation, estimated at 78 per cent in 1996, is also expected to slow, but to remain above 50 per cent.

Notwithstanding the marked growth in economic output over the past two years, unemployment remains a key concern throughout the region. High labour-force growth rates, coupled with the slowdown in economic activities brought about by the decline in oil prices since the mid-1980s - have pushed up unemployment rates in many countries in recent years. Unemployment rates vary widely, ranging from less than 5 per cent in most of the oil-exporting countries to 6.8 per cent in Israel, 13 per cent in Jordan, 25 per cent in Yemen and about 30 per cent in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. Employment opportunities have been linked to the economics of oil in the fuel-exporting and some of the fuel-importing countries. Given the dominance of the public sector in job creation in the fuel-exporting countries, tightening of public spending over the past few years and Governments' efforts to reduce payrolls have led to deteriorating employment conditions. Moreover, unemployment difficulties in Jordan and Yemen have been exacerbated by stricter migration policies in most of the Gee countries.
Unemployment of educated nationals has begun to be a concern in the Gee countries, where retrenchment of public employment in the face of a rising number of job applicants has restricted opportunities in the managerial positions usually sought by nationals. As expatriates constitute about 60 per cent of the labour force, a policy option being considered is to reduce the number of foreign workers. Such policies might have limited impact, however, as they would free up employment primarily in lower-skill jobs, which are not the ones typically sought by educated nationals.
After two consecutive years of unusually rapid growth of world trade when world export volume grew around 10 per cent per annum - the growth of world trade slipped abruptly in 1996 (see table A.19). The volume of global merchandise exports grew only 4.6 per cent in 1996 and all regions of the world shared in the deceleration, albeit to different degrees. However, the growth of world output did not decelerate in 1996 and so the trade slowdown seemed a potentially worrisome anomaly (see figure IlLl). It nevertheless appears now that the slowdown was a temporary phenomenon and world export volume is forecast to rise more strongly in 1997, mainly on the strength of stronger import growth in North America and the developing countries. "The open-economy" strategies being followed today by developed, developing and transition economies require an enabling international economic environment, one whose dynamism creates the occasion for faster economic growth and whose liberalism opens more opportunities and closes fewer of them to the entrepreneurial elements in all the countries of the world. Recent and prospective international flows of trade, direct investment and finance suggest that a global dynamism is continuing to build, although the 1996 trade developments were a reminder that the international environment is subject to slowdowns and downturns as well as accelerations and upturns. In addition, the continuing concentration of fmancial flows on a limited number of countries underlines how the benefits of the liberal model are not being spread broadly enough among countries at different stages of development or economic adjustment.
Government policies represent a way to compensate for the uneven workings of market phenomena and a basic reason for the existence of official financial flows. Recent negative trends and policy developments in this area, however, particularly with regard to official development assistance (ODA), have been a cause for concern.
Nevertheless, one development has been especially encouraging, a new and more concessional treatment of the debt of several heavily indebted poor countries. It demonstrates that the possibility exists for adopting new assistance measures when the need can be clearly demonstrated and when leadership is resolute. All in all, such developments warrant a more focused consideration by the international community. u The dip in world trade expansion in 1996 hit Asia and the Pacific especially hard. Japan among developed market economies and China among developing countries experienced the sharpest slowdowns in the growth rates of export volume. In Eastern and Southern Asia, where international trade has been credited as being the main engine of the region's phenomenal economic expansion, the growth of exports fell below the growth of output. In contrast, Latin America and the Caribbean and Africa saw their export volume slow only slightly (see table A.19). The transition economies of Central and Eastern Europe (CEETEs), however, saw the growth of their exports all but disappear.
Weaker demand in developed countries, whose imports account for about two thirds of world trade (see table A.16), was the primary source of the slower export growth worldwide. The volume of imports of industrialized countries grew by 5.2 per cent in 1996, down from 7.6 per cent in 1995 (see table A.19).
The deceleration was sharpest in Japan, where the volume of imports grew only 3.5 per cent in 1996, after having grown by 12.5 per cent in 1995 and 13.6 per cent in 1994. The earlier years of rapid import growth in Japan had been in response to the extreme strengthening of the yen, as demand was quite weak.
Indeed, recovery from economic recession in Japan began to gather some momentum only in 1996, the same year that import growth plummeted. A major reason is that the yen also plummeted in 1996, falling almost 14 per cent in real effective terms (see table A.9).
Import growth in Western Europe slowed in 1996. This was a major factor behind the slower growth of exports of the region, since about two thirds of the exports of developed Europe go to other developed European countries.2 At the same time, Western European exports to the rest of the world grew more strongly, propelled in part by the lowering of the exchange rate of the deutsche mark against the dollar during the year, which assisted Germany and the countries whose exchange rates closely follow the marlc Continued strong import demand in some trading partners was also important, not least in the CEETEs.
By the same token, the CEETEs, among other exporters to Western Europe, also felt the import slowdown of Western Europe. The volume of CEETE exports had grown by almost 20 per cent in 1995, but growth was almost nil in 1996 (see table A.19). Besides the slowdown in their Western European partners, other factors for the CEETEs were at play, including the appreciation of their currencies and the diversion of domestic production from exports to the satisfying of burgeoning domestic demand. In addition, the composition of exports has only partly shifted away from resource-intensive, low-skill and lowtechnology products for which international demand has been less buoyant.
Although comprehensive data are unavailable on the volume of trade of the member countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), indications are that these countries were less affected by the slowdown in Western Europe than the CEETEs. Their trading ties with Western Europe have not been as intensive as those of the CEETEs and they had some success in 1996 in restoring - this time based upon market principles - the formerly strong trading ties that once existed among themselves! Furthermore, the CIS countries rely considerably more heavily on raw material exports than the CEETEs. In particular, primary energy exports continued to account for the bulk of the export revenues of the Russian Federation. In 1996, they accounted for 45 per cent of the total; machinery and equipment exports accounted for less than 10 per cent.
One unusual factor in the slowdown in world trade growth in 1996 - and an indication of how much the world economy has changed - is that developments in a single industry, one that operated on a far smaller scale a decade ago, help to explain changes in the aggregate flow of trade at the global level.
Usually, the developments in a single industry are too small to affect the $5 trillion a year of world trade in a significant way. In recent decades, the only comparable single-industry impact was that of international petroleum, which was felt when two highly unusual political episodes engendered the opportunity for extraordinary price increases in the 1970s. Those developments occurred when world trade totalled less than $2 trillion per year and economies were much more vulnerable to the sudden withdrawal of energy supplies than today.
The special industry development in question in 1996 was a temporary sharp drop in world demand for semiconductors and information-technology products. The fact that global production capacity for computer chips had increased sharply in 1995 and 1996, put downward pressure on prices and made it less necessary for large end-users to keep substantial inventories to ensure smooth production runs. These firms reduced their inventories in 1996.
Furthermore, the rise in demand for office and telecommunications equipment slowed down in 1996, after a sharp rise in 1995. These phenomena very much affected the expOlts of several countries in Eastern and Southern Asia, which have become major suppliers to the world market.4
Moreover, in the same way that the trade of the Western European economies with each other became very dynamic, especially in specialized subsectors of manufacturing trade, the economies of Eastern and Southern Asia, China and Japan are increasingly becoming major markets for each other's goods (see tables A.15 and A.16). A significant part of that trade is in electronic goods and components.
This is not to say that there were not also other causes for the regional export slowdown in Asia in 1996. For example, the appreciation of the dollar, to which many of the region's major exporters link their exchange rates, served to make their exports less competitive in the Japanese and European markets. In addition, some major exporters of labour-intensive products have been facing rising production costs and are losing competitiveness to lower-cost producers.
Moreover, other factors of a more localized character were also at work. For example, part of the reason that the volume of exports from China increased by less than 1 per cent in 1996 compared with over 20 per cent in 1995, is. that an incentive arose to hurry production and shipment of exports in late 1995 that might otherwise have been registered in early 1996. Part of the cause was a reduction oin the rebate on value-added taxes as of late 1995, which prompted enterprises to rush exports so as to take advantage of the higher rebate rate while it lasted. At the same time, a price advantage that had been generated by a large devaluation at the beginning of 1995 had boosted exports in that year, but it was largely eroded by inflation by the end of the year. Thus, exports increased to unsustainable levels in 1995 for a short period, and thus led to much slower. export growth in the first half of 1996.
While the dynamic Asian economies thus saw their export growth cut sharply, the slowdown in their import growth was more moderate, in part driven by stillstrong investment in many of the economies. Liberalization measures have also served to stimulate import inflows, as was also the case in the region of Latin America and the Caribbean. Other factors operated as well in the latter region, including recovery from recession in Argentina and Mexico and the regional cooperation policy embedded in the Southern Cone Common Market (MERCOSUR) and other regional trading arrangements. Indeed, intra-group exports grew in 1996 at a rate double that of exports to the rest of the world, while their share of Latin America's total trade in 1996 (23 per cent) has become virtually twice what it was in 1991. In addition, Mexico's participation in the North American Free Trade Area (NAFTA) has been a major factor in its recent export success.
Western Asia's import volume bounced back after two years of decline resulting from drastic fiscal adjustment in the wake of lower oil revenues.
Regional import volume was estimated to have increased by almost 8 per cent in 1996 and similar growth is expected in 1997.
In Africa, import volume in 1996 continued its substantial growth of recent years, reflecting the acceleration of regional economic growth that began in 1994, and the recent robust growth in investment in such countries as Cote d'Ivoire, Egypt, Kenya, South Africa and Zambia. Export volume grew more rapidly than imports (see tableA;19). Favourable growing conditions and reforms that contributed to the recovery of agricultural output in the majority of countries also led to an increase in exports of agricultural commodities. In some countries, non-traditional exports continued to perform well and the importance of these exports continued to increase - yet generally from a small base - in, for example, Botswana, Egypt, Ghana, Kenya, Malawi, Uganda,
Zambia and Zimbabwe. These countries thus continued to make progress in diversifying their exports in areas such as manufacturing for regional markets and horticulture for markets in Europe.
Mrica's exports continue to be overwhelmingly shipped to developed-economy markets; for example, the latter took 78 per cent of Africa's exports in 1996, with European countries maintaining their position as Africa's largest trading partners. Trade with the United States of America, however, has been growing rapidly in recent years, although it is concentrated in a small number of countries (Angola, Cote d'Ivoire, Ethiopia, Ghana, Kenya, Nigeria, South Africa and Zimbabwe). This trade may expand more rapidly in the future, as the United States Administration has proposed legislation to the Congress that would lead to establishing a free-trade area between the United States and sub-Saharan Africa in some goods, increased imports of textiles and clothing, and reduced trade barriers on other products.5
That Africa's exports to Eastern and Southern Asia have grown strongly (increasing from 1.5 per cent of total exports in 1990 to almost 6 per cent in 1996), is largely attributable to the rapid growth of trade between South Africa and several countries in that region. South Africa also accounts for much of the growth of intra-African exports, which rose from 6 per cent of total exports in 1990 to 10 per cent in 1996. In some cases, this trade engenders potential adjustment costs, as imports from South Africa displace local production. Formal trading groups in the region also provided expanded markets for trade among member countries, although trade within each group still represents only a small proportion of total trade. and markets For several African countries, as for other commodity exporting countries, substantial export volume increases did not translate into comparable gains in 1996 in foreign exchange earnings. The reason was a weakening in prices on international markets, as the commodity price boom of recent years has clearly ended (see figure III.2).
Lower commodity prices in 1996 could be attributed to increased supplies and weak demand in every major non-fuel category except food. Indeed, food prices, as a group, were the only ones to rise last year (see table A.21). This resulted mainly from large price gains for wheat and grain, especially in the second quarter of 1996. Prices climbed to near-record levels as a result of extensive weather-related damage to the United States winter wheat crop, increased consumption and lower exports in Europe, low levels of global stocks and high worldwide demand. By the fourth quarter of the year, however, production in the five largest grain exporting countries increased by over 20 per cent, following which prices declined steeply for maize (30 per cent) and wheat (9 per cent).
Tropical beverage prices lost considerable ground in 1996, after three consecutive years of increases, as a result of a substantial decline in coffee prices (tea prices increased during the year, while cocoa prices declined only moderately).
This reflected large increases in the volume of exports from Brazil and other major producers. The withdrawal of several African countries from the export-retention scheme of the Association of Coffee Producer Countries (ACPe) contributed to excess supplies and the erosion of coffee prices in 1996.
Prices of raw materials - agricultural raw materials such as cotton, natural rubber and lumber, as well as the minerals and metals group of commodities - also fell considerably in 1996, after strong gains in each of the preceding two years. Lower prices generally resulted from high levels of production and exports and lower demand in critical end-use industries such as construction and transportation in the United States and other industrialized countries.
Strong import demand in China and countries in Eastern and Southern Asia, however, as in recent years, prevented steeper price declines of many commodities in this group.
Commodity prospects remain mixed and in any case quite uncertain. However, certain developments do not augur well for some commodity exporters, especially the poorest and most vulnerable among them. For example, as a result of Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations reductions of support in agricultural trade (conversion of non-tariff barriers to tariffs and reduction in tariff rates) and new multilateral rules of the World Trade Organization, there has been an erosion of the general and special trade preferences accorded to African, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) countries associated with the European Union (EU) under the Lome Convention. The EUhas already begun discussion of how it might realign this system of preferences after the expiration of the present Lome Convention in the year 2000. 6 Moreover, the successful challenge by the United States and several Latin American countries to the EU's banana import regime in 1996 ~ in which the World Trade Organization upheld the complaint of the United States that the EU's banana import policy unfairly discriminated against United States firms and Latin American producers - might hasten the process of the dismantling of ACP trade preferences and market access privileges. Several high-cost banana producing countries in the Caribbean stand to lose their major source of foreign exchange earnings as a result of the ruling. Together, these factors may well force sharp adjustments on countries that are overwhelmingly dependent on commodities as the principal sources of export revenues. Many of the countries are least developed or island developing countries with limited capacity to adjust if they have to rely only on their own resources.
Moreover, while the price declines of 1996 are a reminder that commodity prices typically follow cycles, certain developments in 1996 point to the possibility of increasing market instability and thus increased price volatility in international commodity trade. These relate, in particular, to reforms in the agricultural sectors of developed countries and a growing list of developing countries, which may be expected to subject domestic and international trade in agricultural commodities to more volatile supply and price swings.
In addition, less and less international trade in commodities is being conducted under price-stabilization mechanisms, following the collapse of several international commodity agreements. Only the International Natural Rubber Agreement has survived into 1996 with a buffer-stock arrangement. Even then, the renewed 1995 Agreement entered into force only provisionally in February 1997 (only 73 per cent of major importing countries ratified the Agreement, while ratification by 80 per cent was required for the Agreement to enter into force definitively). Commodity producing countries have in certain cases resorted independently to producer agreements to manage supplies and market prices in attempts to stabilize and bolster export revenues from commodity exports. Such agreements for aluminium, coffee and tin have met with varying degrees of success in recent years, but have proved to be unstable under supply shocks (coffee and tin) or when disagreements emerge among participants about objectives, strategies and the sharing of costs and benefits. Some low-income African countries, for example, withdrew from the ACPC export-retention scheme because they could not afford the accumulated losses in export revenues.
Producers have also attempted to manage price risks through hedging strategies in futures markets. Markets in agricultural and minerals futures contracts are well established in developed countries and certain developing countries, and international trading in commodity-related financial instruments has grown in recent years. New markets for issuing and trading agriculturalfutures or the addition offinancial contracts on new commodities have been introduced in Argentina,
Malaysia, South Africa, Zambia and Zimbabwe. In 1989, Hungary launched the Budapest Commodity Exchange, the first such market in the CEETEs.
The long history of futures markets has been mixed. In their normal functioning, they provide an essential service; but abuses of proper business practices appear from time to time and increase price volatility and market uncertainties and can cause huge financial losses. International copper prices, for example, fell by 20 per cent within a one-month period in the third quarter of 1996 after disclosures of substantial losses by the Sumitomo Corporation (a large Japanese trading company) in trades of financial instruments linked to copper. The disclosures revealed attempts to manipulate copper futures prices and prices in the physical market for copper. A main conclusion from this and other recent episodes emphasizes the importance of the extent and quality of market regulation and the need for international cooperation in the supervision of commodity futures markets.7
International pe:tr4[)IC:~Uln !.lI.HU:-IUJt In 1996, the international oil market was more buoyant than in 1995, and average oil prices over the year rose 20 per cent to about $20 a barrel.s As a result, oil revenues of the member countries of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) rose by an estimated $29 billion in 1996, or about 22 per cent over their level in 1995 (see table A.43).
Total OPEC production, including natural gas liquids, rose only marginally.
Indeed, OPEC decided in November 1996 to continue to freeze oil production quotas at their aggregate level of 25.03 million barrels per day until June 1997, in line with the desire of the majority of members to maintain reasonable price stability even at the cost of losing market share to non-OPEC producers. 9
In fact, the once-sharp annual declines in production from the successor States of the former Soviet Union levelled off in 1996 and output from the North Sea and non-OPEC developing countries rose significantly (see table A.41).
The strengthening of oil prices in 1996 came to an end in December, when the price averaged $23.50 per barrel; by March 1997 the price had returned to $18 (see figure III.3). The factors that had raised prices during the year had ceased to operate by the new year and the higher output noted above helped ease demand pressures arising from longer-run factors.
The rally in prices during 1996 was in part a response to purchases made to replenish low oil inventories and in part the result of a bunching of purchases that could no longer be delayed in expectation of a weakening of prices once Iraq again began to export oil. Iraq had been barred from exporting oil since the United Nations embargo was imposed before the Gulf war, although the Security Council agreed to allow limited exports for humanitarian reasons under Council resolution 986 (1995). However, by the second half of 1996,
Iraqi exports had not yet begun and the' timing of Iraq's return to the market appeared highly uncertain. That uncertainty was finally resolved in December 1996, when the "oil for food" formula was accepted.
In 1997, with the continuing flow of oil exports from Iraq and the steady expansion of output from non-OPEC producers, oil market fundamentals stand to ease still more. A sharp rise in oil output in early 1997 has helped to replenish depleted inventories and the growth in oil demand is expected to be outpaced by the surge in oil supplies over subsequent months. This will lead to a gradual erosion in prices, as a result of which the average price of the OPEC reference basket for 1997 as a whole is not expected to exceed $18 a barrel.
In the medium run, global oil demand is expected to continue growing strongly, particularly in the developing countries of Asia. This will require sustained increases in oil production capacities. A significant part of this increase will come from the Middle East, as well as Venezuela and Algeria and a number of non-OPEC oil-producing countries; but the lack of capital and technology necessary to build new production capacity in line with rising demand has created a new competition to attract foreign oil companies. A number of oil expOJiers, including Algeria, China, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Malaysia, Nigeria, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen and the successor States of the former Soviet Union are encouraging international oil companies to arrange for investment in the exploration and development of their oil resources.
The net transfer of financial resources and the net capital flows among groups of countries continued in 1996 to follow the broad pattern that began to be established in 1992. That is to say, the developed economies as a group sent very considerable financial flows to the developing countries as a group, more indeed than was needed to finance imports, with the remainder going into substantial official reserve accumulation. The main development in 1996 was that the total dollar value of the net transfer to developing countries was about
$11 billion smaller than in 1995. However, this arose because the net-creditor developing countries virtually doubled the surplus that they transferred abroad, while the transfer to the net-debtor countries was virtually unchanged (see table II!. I). The net transfer out of the developed countries was also somewhat smaller in 1996 (see table A.26). The anomalous situation in 1995, when the economies in transition became a net supplier of financial resources to the rest of the world, appears to have been reversed in 1996, owing to sharply increased imports in Central and Eastern Europe (see table A.24).
By all indications, the global pool of international finance continues to grow very rapidly. The total value of international arrangements of medium-term bank loans and bond issues passed the $1 trillion mark in 1996 for the first time (see table A.31). It took less than four years for that figure to be reached from half that amount, truly a remarkable rate of growth.14 Almost all of these funds are absorbed by developed-country borrowers; however, after developing countries took about $75 billion in new credits each year from 1993 to 1995, their borrowing leaped to almost $120 billion in 1996. By the same token, global flows of direct investment have also burgeoned in recent years and while these funds continue to be mainly placed in developed host countries, many developing countries and some transition economies have attracted large investment inflows.15 Clearly, whether as credits or investments, funds are available for "bankable" projects and "creditworthy" countries. The concern for the future, however, is in how to mobilize adequate resources for projects that are not privately bankable and for countries that are not yet deemed creditworthy.
Net transters of deve,loped countries As in previous years, the net transfer from developed to developing countries came despite the large net absorption of financial resources by the economy of the United States. In addition, in 1996, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland absorbed almost $25 billion in net resource inflows, while Japan provided smaller net financial outflows than in earlier years. The difference was made up by the rest of the developed world and in particular by Germany, whose outward transfer exceeded $25 billion in 1996 (see table A.26).
The net resource transfer to the United States reached $127 billion, after taking into account its net payment abroad of almost $50 billion in dividends and interest (reflecting its net-debtor position). This was the largest net transfer to the United States since 1987 (see table A.26). The net capital inflow of almost $170 billion was driven in particular by surging foreign purchases of United States securities in a year in which the dollar exchange rate rose and United States financial markets performed strongly, especially compared with those in Western Europe and Japan. In any event, the increased net financial inflows found a ready use, as the trade deficit of the United States grew by almost $15 billion (see table A.23).
In the past, a substantial part of the net financial transfers to the United States - and to other net capital-importing countries - came from Japan. In 1996, however, the net transfer of financial resources from Japan fell to the lowest level since 1990, when temporarily high petroleum-import costs and slower export growth had limited the size of the trade surplus. In 1996, again Japan's trade surplus was much reduced - indeed it was more than one third lower than in 1995 (see table A.23) - and this reduced on a net basis the funds to be placed abroad.
What is especially striking in the recent Japanese experience, however, is that, in 1996 as in 1995, the net capital outflow of the Japanese economy was less than the net foreign investment by the Bank of Japan, the central bank.
The financial flow of the latter represents the increase in official reserve assets (primarily foreign government securities) that were purchased as part of the effort to stem the strengthening of the yen in foreign exchange markets. In all,
Japan added over $150 billion to its reserve holdings in the past four years.
Over $110 billion was added in 1993-1995, when the nominal effective exchange rate of the yen rose almost 50 per cent. Exchange-rate policy was not as impotent as these data seem to indicate, however, because Japan's inflation rate had become quite low. The real (inflation-adjusted) effective exchange rate rose less than 20 per cent in this period and most of that rise was in the first year. Moreover, in 1996, with continued reserve accumulation, the real effective exchange rate returned almost to the 1992 level (see table A.9).

Based on recorded trade and current account surpluses, the countries of CIS together made net financial transfers to the rest of the world in 1996. The countries of Central and Eastern Europe and the Baltics, on the other hand, drew on foreign finance on a net basis in 1996, as there was widespread deterioration in trade balances. Poland, in particular, shifted from a significant current account surplus in 1995 to a deficit in 1996 (see table A.24).
Whether required to cover trade and current account deficits or not, private financial inflows to most ofthe transition economies continued to grow in 1996.
Flows to some of the CEETEs, in particular, have been quite strong, leading to the build-up of official reserves. Hungary's external position became sufficiently strong for it to repay $4 billion of outstanding debt. More generally, foreign debt burdens are at modest levels, in some cases having declined sharply in recent years (see table A.35). Indeed, only one transition economy, Bulgaria, is currently classified by the World Bank as a heavily indebted country.16
Direct investment - attractive as a non-debt creating financial inflow, as well as for being a source of technology and management services - had been virtually non-existent in the transition economies before 1989. In 1996 the net inflow exceeded $11 billion for the second year in a row (it was less than $6 billion in 1994). Total direct investment was even higher in 1995 ($13 billion), when flows had been stronger to the Czech Republic, Hungary and the Russian Federation. Even so, direct investment in those three countries plus Kazakstan and Poland accounted for over 70 per cent of the total in 25' couril tries tracked in 1996.17
In addition to direct investment inflows, transition economies raised almost
$7 billion in medium-term funds on international capital markets, compared with only $2 billion in 1995 (see table A.31). Recent borrowers included Kazakstan, Romania and Slovenia, joined by Croatia in January 1997. The share of borrowing on these markets by sovereign Governments is tending to decline, while that by enterprises and municipalities has been on the rise.
The Russian Federation was also one of the borrowers on international financial markets, when in November 1996 it placed its first $1 billion Eurobond issue, which was oversubscribed. This successful return to the market followed upon efforts over several years to deal with the heavy foreign debt obligations of the Soviet Union, which the Russian Federation had assumed.
Thus, after a sequence of temporary arrangements, a final rescheduling agreement with commercial banks had been negotiated through the London Club in November 1995, covering $30.2 billion of debt. It went into effect in September 1996, when the minimum number of individual bank creditors subscribed to the agreement and the Russian Federation made its required partial repayments of interest arrears. In addition, $40.2 billion of debt owed to government creditors; which had been rescheduled annually since 1992 through the Paris Club, was rescheduled in an "exit" arrangement in April 1996, in the largest rescheduling agreement in the history of the Paris Club.18 That agreement was followed by a series of bilateral implementing agreements that were struck through early 1997. The Russian Federation also agreed with the French Government on the final settlement of remaining tsarist bond claims.
The Russian Federation has also been a major recipient of official financial flows, in particular from the International Monetary Fund (IMF), which approved standby or extended arrangements to assist a dozen transition economies in 1996. Net disbursements by the Fund to all transition economies dropped in 1996, however, by about $1 billion to $3.7 billion, although more funds were committed for disbursement over longer adjustment periods (see table A.30). In addition, lending commitments by the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) fell more than $400 million in 1996 compared with 1995, although they still totalled over $2.8 billion (see table A.34).
Net fmancial transfers and flows to dil';v{,lopulig countries The basic dimensions and the basic dilemma of the net transfer of financial resources to the developing countries continued for another year in 1996.
Those countries that can tap international capital markets for a wide variety of projects and that successfully host direct investment continued to see substantial inflows of funds, often including large-scale portfolio flows. Together these totalled more financing than was employed in expanded capital formation, which led to substantial reserve accumulation and unwanted pressure for appreciation of local exchange rates in several countries. Even so, theexpansion of foreign borrowing has not been so rapid as to significantly raise either debt-to-export or debt-to-gross domestic product (GDP) ratios in any of the major groups of developing countries. Indeed, in the regions where the ratios had been high (Africa and Latin America), they were at about the same level in 1996 as in 1995 or they fell, while in Asia, the region with the lowest debt burden indicators, the external debt-to-exports ratio rose slightly (see table A.37).19
The concentration of private flows on a limited number of recipients remains very high: 10 countries <:tccounted for 77 per cent of the total flow to developing countries in 1996.20 Other countries perforce rely mainly on official, especially concessional sources of external financing and they continued to face an increasingly limited supply offunds in 1996. Perhaps the most positive prospect that can be held out to policy makers in some of the poorest and most heavily indebted countties is thaUheir international cash flow difficulties are likely to be increasingly alleviated by greater debt relief, as is noted below, if not greater aid flows.
The net-debtor developing countries takentogether came to hold $465 billion in official reserve assets at the end of 1996, a value equivalent to almost four months of imports of goods, services and investment income payments (see table A.28). For a sample of 105 ∑ofthese countries, the net transfer from all financial sources, after net payment of interest and dividends, totalled $87 billion, of which $35 billion was used to pay for goods and services imports
- the "net transfer" in table 111.1 -and the rest, $52 billion, was added to reserves (see tableA.27).
At this level of aggregation, resource flows through major categories of private financing have clearly been plentiful. For example, despite net payment of dividends and other profit remittances, the sample of developing countries received a net transfer associated with direct foreign investment of over $40 billion in 1996. The actual.net investment flow for this sample of countries was almost $68 billion, more than twice theJevel of 1992 (see table A.27).
The resource concentration of private flows as a whole, mentioned above, is reflected in each of the component flows, not least in direct investment. Thus,
Southern and Eastern Asia received two thirds of the total direct investment flow to developing countries in 1996, with China alone accounting for about 44 per cent,21 reflecting continued liberalization of foreign investment treatment in China and sustained and rapid economic growth. Elsewhere in the region, investment in member countries of the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) continued to be strong and to benefit from the restructuring of production in the region and Japan. Indeed, economies of the region have become sources of direct investment as well, with Hong Kong, the Republic of Korea, Singapore and Taiwan Province of China serving as the major sources.
China, Malaysia and Thailand are also emerging as investors. The major destinations of their investment are developed economies, but there is also increasing investment in Africa and Latin America.
Direct investment in the region of Latin America and the Caribbean also con~ tinued to strengthen, accounting for more than a quarter of the total in 1996. One of the stronger factors attracting foreign investment in this case has been privatization.
Prospects for significant privatization exercises in the banking, energy, mining and telecommunications sectors in several countries, including Bolivia,
Brazil, Colombia, El Salvador, Guatemala, Mexico and Venezuela, will continue to attract substantial foreign direct investment in the foreseeable future.
Africa, in marked contrast, accounted for less than 5 per cent of direct invest ment in the developing countries in 1996. Indeed, owing to the dividend and other profit payments on existing investments in Africa, the net transfer from direct investment in the net-debtor countries of Africa was a net cash outflow of about $1 billion last year (see table A.27). Foreign direct investment remained concentrated in the mining sector (particularly in energy) and in only a few countries.
Although most investment originated in developed economies, there has also been some investment from developing Asia, in particular from Malaysia and the Republic of Korea. In addition, foreign direct investment is increasing from other African countries, in particular from Ghana and South Mrica.
Perhaps as a sign of the future, there have also recently been some important foreign direct investments in African manufacturing, for example, in electronics in Morocco, in car assembly in Botswana, Egypt and South Africa, and in textiles in Madagascar, and new measures to encourage foreign investments were announced in 1996, inter alia, in Egypt, South Africa and Tunisia. Also, acceleration of privatization programmes in some African countries may provide additional occasions for enhanced direct investment inflows.
The growth in amount and distribution of medium-term lending to the developing countries roughly follows the pattern for direct investment. Thus, owing to the overall surge in flows, the sample of 105 net-debtor developing countries were able to pay over $42 billion in interest on bonds and medium-term bank loans in 1996 and still retain a net transfer on this type of financing of over $42 billion. The almost $85 billion in net lending from these sources in 1996 more than doubled the level of 1994 (see table A.27). Again, Asia and Latin America accounted for almost all of the funds raised on capital markets, and about 80 per cent of the funds that went to Africa were absorbed by South Africa.
The picture could not be more different for official flows. Official grants have remained virtually unchanged since 1994, about $10 billion a year.22 Official lending in 1996 dropped to zero, net of repayments, although this needs to be read in conjunction with the surge in this form of lending in 1995 (see table A.27). In other words, the 1995 figure includes large loans to Mexico by the United States ($12.5 billion), IMF ($17.8 billion) and other official creditors in the' context of Mexico's balance-of-payments crisis, some of which were repaid in advance in 1996, after Mexico regained access to private financial markets and could again float bond issues. Thus, the net flow of official lending shown in table A.27 was unusually large in 1995 and unusually small in 1996.
However, even without the Mexican developments, the flows of official credits have been largely static. Partly, this is a "demand-driven" phenomenon, as several Governments, in Asia in particular, can raise funds on private markets on more favourable terms than are available from multilateral development banks (the loans in question are from non-concessionallending programmes).
In addition, developing countries made net repayments to IMF in 1996 of $3 billion, as the 1995 borrowing surge associated with the Mexican crisis and its aftermath ended; and while IMF initiated 20 new adjustment financing programmes in 1996, they were generally smaller operations (although Argentina and Venezuela were significant borrowers), entailing total commitments of only
$5.2 billion (see table A.29). In this regard, the fact that larger demands are not being made on fund resources at this time can be applauded as a sign of an easing of adjustment pressures on at least some developing countries.z3
In addition, however, two factors have been operating on the "supply side" to slow official lending. One factor has been an effort in the multilateral development institutions - lending institutions and operational agencies of the United Nations - to improve the quality of projects and programmes and to streamline operations, as a response to critical internal operations assessments.
This has caused a rethinking of some proposals and has slowed disbursements of planned flows in some cases.
The second factor is the more limited availability of supplies of resources, especially the concessional grants and loans that make up ODA, to commit to development financing. Far from approaching the United Nations target of ODA flows equivalent to 0.7 per cent of donor country gross national product (GNP), the average of the developed donor country aid "effort" dropped to 0.27 per cent of GNP in 1995 and a further decline is possible in 1996 and 1997.25 Four countries (Denmark, the Netherlands, Norway and Sweden), the same ones that do so each year, exceeded the United Nations aid target in 1995, while the country that had been traditionally the largest donor, the United States, contributed aid equivalent to only 0.10 per cent of GNP and dropped to fourth place (behind Japan, France and Germany) in the total dollar value of flows (see table A.32).
This impacts especially hard on Africa, which has received about 45 per cent of total ODA flows in recent years (see table A.33). It is, indeed, the region with the least access to other forms of financing, as noted above, and is thus the region most dependent on the continuation of such aid flows. o o ON
The decline in total flows of ODA in 1995 and the concern that this was the beginning of a longer-run negative trend has brought into dramatic relief a development that had been growing under the surface for several years. Of all the international trade and financial issues before the international community, this one lies closest to the heart of the "North-South dialogue" at the United Nations and the international commitment to promote development. It thus warrants a special focus here.
The essence of the problem is that with the end of the cold war and with a reduced role for the State in economic affairs being widely seen (see chap. V), the motivations for continued large ODA commitments have been reassessed in some donor countries. To a degree, improved efficiency and clearer goals for ODA should help rebuild donor support and indeed international work in this area has grown appreciably in recent years. Ultimately, however, political leadership will determine whether or not ODA has a future, in the same way that strong leadership has been required to tum the "HIPe Debt Initiative" (see below) into reality. aid dollar When much of the intellectual work on ODA was undertaken in the 1960s, it was mainly seen as financial and technical assistance in order to fill gaps between the resources available and those needed to reach planned rates of economic growth. Financial markets were not open to developing countries and the Marshall Plan experience in post-war reconstruction was still fresh in the minds of all. The central project for development was to shorten the period needed for poorer countries to catch up with the richer ones.
For some time, this model has not fit what donors were seeking to accomplish through ODA. Attempts to redefine ODA and donor goals have been made over the years in various forums and discussion continues in thecommunity of policy scholars. Over the past few years, the Development Assistance Committee (DAC) of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) has undertaken a major review of ODA in a series of reports and consensus statements. This effort culminated in the adoption at the Thirtyfourth High-Level Meeting of DAC of a new statement of goals that is intended to guide the future development of ODA of DAC member countries. The goals are mainly social and environmental, with a fundamental focus on poverty alleviation.
They are also very precise, with targets to be met by the year 2005 or 2015, largely drawn from the series of international conferences held under United Nations auspices between 1990 and 1996. The targets provide the aid community with new guideposts against which to measure aid programmes and for use in arguing for larger aid appropriations in legislatures. In short, they "clarify the vision of a higher quality of life for all people", attainment of this higher quality of life being the main aim of aid programmes.23
By the same token, the multilateral development institutions have been making a deep re-examination of their operational strategies, whose short-term consequence in slowing down resource disbursements was noted above. The outcome of the exercise can entail a new strategy for programme lending or a new set of project evaluation criteria (for example, regarding social and environmental impacts) and an internal reorganization. In the case of the World Bank in particular, concern about such issues has led to the concept of a "strategic compact", which aims to make the Bank "more cost-effective, participatory, flexible, and responsive to client needs", as the Development Committee noted when it endorsed the concept at its April 1997 meeting.30
Change in the governance of an institution itself may be part of new reforms.
This was the case at the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), for example, which in November 1996 agreed to several changes as part of the fourth replenishment of its resources. One change is in governing structure: the original rigid three-category system of membership (OECD,
OPEC and developing-country members) is being changed into a more flexible system in which member countries will have two types of votes, namely equal membership votes and votes based on the size of their contribution to IFAD.
In addition to making service provision more effective, multilateral institutions have also sought to overcome disappointing financial commitments by some donor Governments. One approach has been to bolster lending authority by more than new donor contributions themselves would allow by redirecting some of the profits of the non-concessional part of the institution into the concessionallending affiliate. This was employed, in particular, in March 1996 in the eleventh replenishment of the International Development Association (IDA), the concessionallending arm of the World Bank.
A similar arrangement was struck in Tokyo in January 1997 for the Seventh Replenishment of the Asian Development Fund (ADF-VII), the soft-loan arm of the Asian Development Bank. Donors agreed to a $6.3 billion replenishment for the period 1997-2000. Only $2.6 billion of this amount will comprise new contributions (a far-lower new resource share than before). The rest of the funds are to come from repayments of past loans, interest income and profit transfers from the Bank's non~concessional operations. Also noteworthy, about half of the donated funds forADF-VII are to come from within the Asian region. Thus, Malaysia and Thailand will make their first contributions to ADF, as will Indonesia, a current ADF borrower.
HIPC Debt Initiative One common aspect of recent multilateral and ODA reform efforts is the difficulty that Governments have had in reaching a workable consensus, as reflected by the need noted above for alternative funding arrangements to compensate for the low level of financial commitments that the donors as a group were able to make. In this regard, the World Bank and IMF debt-relief initiative for a group of "heavily indebted poor countries" (HIPCs) is interesting, as it requires unusual creditor coordination in order to grant unprecedented amounts of relief.
The countries in question, numbering 41 on the basis of a preliminary assessment by IMF and the World Bank, have accumulated substantial debts to official creditors while their debt-carrying capacity was being deeply eroded by differing combinations of international and domestic economic disappointments.
Long after the heavily indebted middle-income countries were obtaining massive restructurings of the debt owed to international commercial banks, creditor Governments and multilateral institutions were expanding their lending to poor countries and rescheduling debt-service payments with only limited degrees of concessionality. The sense of realism about the effective insolvency of Governments that the markets had been imposing on bank creditors of middle income countries was not shared by official lenders to poor countries.32
By the time the new President of the World Bank took office, it was increasingly clear that a number of poor countries were likely to remain effectively insolvent even after they had completed strong adjustment measures and after having factored in both the most concessional debt-restructuring terms available and prospective receipts of aDA. As a result, the President of the Bank, jointly with the Managing Director of IMF, developed the HIPC Debt Initiative, which the Interim and Development Committees endorsed in their fall 1996 meetings?3
The programme for HIPC countries, which beg~n to be implemented this year,entails a number of stages and decision points.34 First, an eligible country must establish a three-year "track record" of policy performance, during which time it may benefit from a two-thirds reduction of its debt-service obligations to Paris Club creditors and receive additional concessional assistance from multilateral and bilateral sources. Second, once the track record is established, if it is decided that deeper debt reduction than is otherwise available is required, application is made to the Executive Boards of the Fund and the Bank for support under the HIPC initiative. Approval starts the second stage, under which the Paris Club creditors are to provide up to 80 per cent reduction of debt servicing, other creditors are to provide comparable treatment, donors and multilateral institutions provide enhanced support and the country establishes a second three-year track record. Countries can receive credit for past adjustment policy performance and so the six-year HIPC process can be shortened.
In any event, when the completion point is reached, the stock of debt is reduced, including up to 80 per cent of Paris Club debt, and appropriate and comparable measures are taken by all other creditors.
Official creditors thus have structured the granting of deep debt relief as a reward for completing prescribed policy reforms. However, the fact that the HIPC programme acknowledges that undertaking the reforms without receiving HIPC relief would leave the country in an untenable situation means that it has also made it imperative that the HIPC programme actually deliver the promised debt relief. If it could not do so, other potential HIPC countries would be effectively told that after six years of following the strong adjustment urged by the international community, they might still be in an untenable situation.
It might have been simpler just to acknowledge the effective insolvency of the countries as sufficient reason to give up creditor claims (as in conventional bankruptcy). Now, however, it is absolutely essential that the Bank and Fund mobilize all creditors to deliver on the promised debt relief.
One country advanced to the HIPC decision point in the early months of 1997 and the reaction to the decision has been heated. Uganda, the country concerned, was promised a HIPC debt stock reduction and associated relief from multilateral debt, but not until 1998. As Uganda has been "on track" since 1987, it could well have been assumed by Uganda and others that the second three-year waiting period would be fully waived. The interim cash-flow problem until the completion date could in any case be handled with additional assistance, to which the World Bank would contribute. However, the expectations in potential HIPC countries had been raised high and the 1998 completion date was seen as a disappointing delay, rather than as a partial victory for crediting past behaviour. The capacity of the international system to actually deliver the promised relief was thus left unclear.
In fact, the HIPC process was still on track; and since the objective of the exercise is removal of the debt overhang, the exact timing of the completion date is less important than having one, especially if equivalent cash-flow support is accorded for the interim period. The commitment made at the decision point is irrevocable (assuming continued satisfactory country performance).
However, appropriate timing of HIPC benefits is important for political reasons
- reasons connected with raising its credibility in the eyes of its potential beneficiaries. Certainly, it is essential that the coordinated package of relief measures be delivered at the completion point. With strong leadership, the HIPC initiative can bring down the curtain on the debt crisis of the 1980s before the end of the 1990s.

Governments everywhere are examining the nature and extent of their activities, especially in the economic and social spheres. The present part of the Survey examines some experiences in these areas in the 1990s.
The analysis is based in part on a review of fiscal reform in 14 countries. 'I The countries were selected because of their different general economic situations, fiscal positions, levels of development, political circumstances and geographical locations. As such, they were viewed as reflecting the range of different circumstances that countries might face when embarking on and implementing fiscal reform; the diverse experiences of these countries in turn determined the selection of issues addressed in chapters V, VI and VII below. 2 The country reviews were supplemented by materials synthesized from the academic and policy literature, including the work of a United Nations high-level group of experts on development strategy and management of the market economy.3
Continuing a practice of recent editions of the World Economic and Social Survey, this part includes an examination of the meaning and robustness of the data that must underlay the analysis required for policy formulation. As will be seen in chapter V, properly identifying the main objects of analysis in fiscal policy raises many questions of a defInitional and empirical nature. As a reflection of this, collaborative work on these matters continues to be undertaken by international agencies, especially in the International Monetary Fund (IMF), where the Manual on Government Finance Statistics is currently under revision, and in the Statistics Division of the United Nations Secretariat.
In many instances, the debate about the role of the State in the economy has been driven by concern that government expenditure was exceeding government revenue, sometimes by a substantial amount. As a result, the stock of government debt in many countries has grown appreciably, and sometimes rapidly, during recent decades, and become increasingly large in relation to gross domestic product (GDP). The ratio of government debt to GDP cannot continue to increase indefinitely. At some point, a Government is likely to become unable to cover its deficit by issuing new debt on reasonable terms.
This might make it impossible to J:esist resorting to the undesirable course of financing deficits through money creation, that is to say, through the "inflation tax". Alternatively, the volume of debt might reach a level requiring taxation of such magnitude as would either deter private initiative or be unacceptable to the populace. Especially, but not exclusively, in countries whose debt is partially held by foreigners, another increasingly important reason for this inability to continue running a sizeable fiscal deficit is that present-day globalized and sophisticated financial markets impose heavy costs on any country that has government deficits judged by these markets to be excessive.4
In order to avoid such outcomes, an effort has to be made to reduce the deficit by combinations of increasing government revenues and reducing government expenditures. In recent practice, however, the predominant response to such a predicament has been to place greater emphasis on reducing expenditures than on raising revenues. To some extent, this reflects the fear expressed above, namely that the level of taxation is perceived to already be approaching, or to have reached, its maximum acceptable level. However, this situation applies mainly to developed countries where tax revenue as a share of GDP is generally higher than in developing countries and economies in transition.
While hostility towards higher taxes may be a reason to focus on reducing government expenditures in developed countries, it should be less of an impediment to increasing tax revenue in developing and transition economies. As illustrated in the following chapters, fiscal consolidation in such countries can be a more balanced mix of revenue enhancement and expenditure reduction.
However, even in countries where taxation is relatively low, the recent emphasis has often been on reducing government expenditure rather than on raising revenue. This is because the reputation of the State as an effective actor in the economic and social arena has been tarnished. There is a strong belief in many countries, both in political and economic circles and among the voting public, that the State should do less in this area, or at least that the role of government needs to be re-examined. It is widely felt that Governments should divest themselves of some of the economic and social responsibilities that they have accumulated over the years, either because those responsibilities are not appropriate ones for Governments to bear or because Governments are not proficient in discharging them.
Nevertheless, there remain several economic and social functions that only the State can perform and a number of additional functions that the State should perform or is better placed than other entities to perform. The State has to meet some social responsibilities, primarily those towards members of society encountering undue hardship; it is also generally recognized that the State should ensure the provision of the basic health and education programmes that serve as a foundation for development. With changing economic and social circumstances, the nature and scope of these rightful responsibilities of the State are themselves likely to change. It is therefore important to examine what additional responsibilities it may be necessary for a Government to undertake, as well as those that it might abandon. It may be as important for Governments to change the nature of their expenditures as to reduce their size."
The efforts to reduce government deficits and to define the appropriate responsibilities of the State are closely intertwined. The debates about the need to reduce fiscal deficits tend to be couched in terms of financial and economic considerations of a technical nature, such as the consequences of a deficit for macroeconomic stability, the possibility of financing a large government debt and the economic efficiency of various government activities. While technical factors set limits to the appropriate and sustainable operations of government in a market economy, they leave a vast amount of room for public choice about what Governments should do. The issue of fiscal reform thus goes well beyond the technical dimensions of policy design: it is about the core operations of government and it is central to the nation itself. Discussions about the role of government in the economic and social life of a country are ideological and political in nature, even though they include considerations of whether government has an inherent economic advantage in undertaking particular functions.6 The political dimension can have a profound effect on the success of the technical decisions that are taken.
One reason why fiscal policy has an important political dimension is that government revenue is not used only to provide services: it also shifts resources from one segment of society to another, directly or indirectly, intentionally or unintentionally. Adjusting government expenditure or revenue entails a transfer of income and benefits between generations, social classes or income groups.
Government investment expenditure, such as on roads and other infrastructure, benefits future as well as present generations. Similarly, government education expenditures benefit current young recipients and future society at large both groups at the cost of present-day taxpayers. Taxes to pay for pensions and care for the elderly similarly embody a shift of resources between generations and segments of society. Taxes can also provide revenues to pay incomes to the indigent. Such decisions are political at their core, as was recognized by the Interim Committee of the Board of Governors of IMF in April 1996, when it stated: "Greater transparency of fiscal operations and awareness of the implications of longer-term commitments are needed to build public consensus and support for determined policies to deal with these problems". 7
In order to be able to fulfil its functions in a democratic society, a Government needs a sense of legitimacy in the eyes of the governed. This legitimacy grows in part out of public support for the services provided by the State and for the transfers that it is effecting. There have been several instances in the 1980s and 1990s where respect for the State was seriously eroded. Such situations make it difficult for a new government, however innovative or different its policies, to re-establish authority, in particular to mobilize the tax revenue necessary to fulfil its redefined functions. The necessary new political consensus itself requires both the promise and the delivery of the benefits of reform.
Much of the difficulty with fiscal reform in the transition economies stems from the fact that the previous legitimacy of the State has been eroded and its new role is not fully understood. The transition has involved a shift from a system in which the State was the economy and was responsible for most aspects of daily life to one in which the government is a separate and limited institution in a broader market system. However, among the plurality of economic and social agents, the government is the only institution generally presumed to be subject to detailed public control. Part of the challenge in these economies lies in developing public understanding that the government in a market economy cannot do everything (as it did under central planning) and that it has to pay for what it does do.
Much of the development of representative political institutions has come from the effort to ensure greater public control over the content of government spending and over the exercise of the power to tax~ All such decisions go to the heart of the political process: rates of tax are necessarily set by law and many of the obligations that government has to finance (such as state pensions, the provision of universal free public education up to a certain age and those arising from the commitment to provide a social safety net) are also set∑ by law.
E vv"',v,o o o GN 01 ON
As in most aspects of economic and social policy, there can be no unique or universal approach to fiscal reform- there is much more, in other words, to the implementation of effective fiscal policy than can be covered by any general set of principles. The appropriate policy measures require pragmatic choices that are based on the economic, social and political situation in each country.
Equally importantly, fiscal reform entails a large measure of learning by doing and the subject remains under review by both analysts and practitioners. Even in the past few years, it is possible to identify a shift in views regarding the role and functions of government. Nevertheless, the following three chapters give rise to a number of observations that should be taken into consideration in formulating a strategy for fiscal reform.
A first observation is that the implementation of fiscal reform sometimes warrants the setting aside of a considerable period of time; Too sharp a fiscal contraction can be self-defeating if it lowers national output, and thus tax revenues, while raising expenditures for unemployment compensation. Also, too rapid a correction might impose undue hardship on segments of the population and might therefore become politically unsustainable. However, too slow a rate of deficit reduction might not build sufficient confidence in the government's commitment to sound budget principles. The appropriate speed of budget correction is a variable thai: needs to be addressed on a case-by-case basis. It is not possible to' specify a priori a general time-frame --'- one that should be applied in all situations or maintained in the face of all contingencies - for taking a country from its unsustainable deficit to the "correct" balance.
A second observation is that adopting overarching and invariant budget rules, such as a pledge to reach a specified deficit target by a fixed date, has far more political than economic content. Various bodies have adopted such numerical targets in an effort to tie the hands of legislators and focus on the need to achieve (and maintain) fiscal consolidation. However, such targets do not substitute for political agreement over the underlying policy priorities. If the real problems are not addressed, targets for fiscal correction are likely to result in arbitrary actions, such as across-the-board cuts, as a means to meet the pledged target. Alternatively, the political bodies may seek to evade the rules by creating additional off-budget items, or the limits may simply not be enforced.
A third observation is that it is impossible to specify a "correct" fiscal balance that should serve as the goal of a fiscal consolidation. While Governments must have sustainable fiscal positions and must correct unsustainable deficits when they arise, it is generally easier to specify when a budget deficit is unsound than how to choose from among the policies that are sustainable.
Financial markets increasingly serve as a barometer of a country's fiscal climate, but they have no unique insight into which fiscal balance is most appropriate from an economic, social and political point of view. Nevertheless,present day Governments are encouraged to bias their actions in favour ofrestrictive fiscal politics. Achieving a low budget deficit as a medium-term goal may be viewed as a judicious strategy because it gives the government additional room for manoeuvre when the need arises, for example, when it must apply an expansionary fiscal impulse to combat a recession or respond to domestic calls for increased expenditure in some areas. Additionally, financial markets reward a cautious strategy with lower risk premiums attached to interest rates on government bonds. While there is sometimes concern that fiscal deficits and the resulting government bOrrowing "crowd out" private investment, cutbacks in government may deprive the economy of expeI;lditures (such as for infrastructure) that would "crowd in" private investment. The relationship between national output and govetnment activity and financing is not always clear, thus reinforGing. the view that "there is no simple theory dictating the
'right' level of fiscal deficit". 8
Fourth, the outcomes of the fiscal strategy and the measures adopted sometimes differ from those expected, and require a correction. It was observed in several instances, for example, that tax reform failed to generate the revenues expected because Governments had difficulty in implementing the reform.
Equally, there are cases in which reforms in social spending have, contrary to intentions, led to a redistribution of income away from the poor. Finally, decentralization of authority in one area of activity, while a worthy goal in itself, has sometimes indirectly. undermined the capacity of the central government in another area, for example macroeconomic management.
Fifth,an underlying. difficulty observed in several of the cases investigated for the present study was that.the initiatives. assumed, at least implicitly, the existence of a government institutional capacity∑ that was not yet present. A resulting observation is that many fiscal reforms, especially if they are innovative, require strengthened government capabilities in certain areas (for example, tax administration). Such institutional development thus has to be a central consideration in the design of fiscal reform.9
A sixth observation is that fiscal reform may enter the political agenda without there being a fiscal crisis to prompt this. Over time, circumstances are likely to change and the fiscal situation has to remain congruent with evolving socio-economic realities and changing social values. For example, demographicchanges (ageing populations) and changing views about income redistribution can have important fiscal implications and can come to be reflected in the budget process (see chapter VI below).
A seventh observation is that, even though ideas about new fiscal departures for a country may have been circulating in various domestic and international circles for some time, a political crisis is sometimes the catalyst required to implement these changes. The political transformations in several countries at the turn of the decade were in themselves a call for major changes in the role of the State and provided an opportunity for fiscal strategy to be launched de novo.
By the same token, post-conflict situations create the chance for Governments to redirect themselves towards economic growth and development and, in the process of this refocusing, provide opportunities for fiscal reform. A change in the political leadership has often been a necessary, if not sufficient, condition for launching fiscal reform. In general, even when a Government's current poli cy may have become openly discredited, a new fiscal departure often requires a new government, a new policy team or some other form of new opportunity.
Eighth, for many developing and transition economies, the credibility of a new fiscal programme requires that it be part and parcel of an overall economic adjustment programme, embodying monetary, exchange-rate and structural adjustments. In particular, if fiscal adjustment entails a short-run contraction of aggregate demand and employment, other complementary policies to stimulate production are often required to ensure a smooth correction and the political credibility of the programme.
Adequate international support in such times can make a large difference in the country's capacity to sustain its overall strategy. Several of the country experiences described below serve as a reminder of the importance for a large number of countries of adequate external financing during an adjustment-cumdevelopment programme that embraces fiscal consolidation. Adjustment financing provided by official institutions can enable Governments to reduce deficits in a measured and timely way and can make the difference between contracting and expanding output and employment. Considering the vital importance of the political dimension, the value of this support stands out: it helps build confidence in and thus domestic support for the programme, as well as accelerates the adjustment process, including assisting in budget consolidation through higher tax revenues. For most of the countries of the world, the support of the international community in underwriting fiscal reform remains essential. When responding to requests for such assistance, particular attention should be given to understanding the country-specific political dimensions of the reform and the related need for flexibility in terms of both the degree of precision attached to the fiscal consolidation and the period in which it is to be achieved.
While there appears to be a consensus that the ambitions of government in the economic and social arena were excessive earlier, one must not lose sight of the fact that Governments provide important services and carry out politically mandated economic and social functions, and that only government will undertake many of these activities. Moreover, while government borrowing has been excessive in many cases, it does not follow that Governments should never borrow.
Indeed, there is no reason that government outlays that benefit a generation of citizens - as for a bridge or sewer system - should be fully paid for by current taxpayers rather than by the beneficiaries over time through the servicing of bonds. It is important, in other words, to know where the boundary lies between an appropriate deficit and an excessive one. Partly, tms entails a measurelnent problem: a variety of approaches and recommendations exist on what should be included in the government accounts, how the deficit should be def"med and how small it should be. The present chapter thus seeks to sort through recent thinking about the proper scope of the economic and social activities of government and about budgetary goals for government.
Global optimism about government effectiveness probably peaked after the Second World War. 1 In the 1950s, perhaps half the world believed that state ownership of the means of production and central planning of economic activity were the most desirable means of organizing economic life. The debates in the 1920s and 1930s about whether detailed central direction of economic activity was even feasible were laid to rest by the sustained economic growth of the centrally planned economies, abetted by the technological achievement of the first sputnik space flight. Outside the centrally planned countries, economic organizatdied varying mixtures of state and market activity, albeit with a relatively large state role being deemed proper. Later, these views would change.
The State in Even in countries where capitalist views were held most fervently, the state sector entered a period of substantial growth in economic. and social activities in the post-war decades. Some of this was related to cold war military procurement and security-related research, development and education funding, but the role of the State in purely civilian activities also grew. State enterprises were supported and new ones created well into the post-war era and public schemes of social insurance burgeoned. Citizen movements for social change pressured Governments to take on new social responsibilities and typically to address them through additional government expenditure programmes.
In the waretorn economies of Europe and Japan, government had been given a large role in post-war reconstruction. Ideas about government economic forecasting and non-coercive economic planning to ensure consistency and an adequate macroeconomic outlook were employed for recovery programmes in member countries of what became the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). Planning was continued after reconstruction in some countries as a tool for consultation and concertation of information flows between government and various private-sector constituencies, aimed, inter alia, at anticipating and avoiding bottlenecks, and assuring adequate growth of demand and thus employment. Even where there was no formal planning, the "Keynesian revolution" spread to policy-making circles and government became responsible for managing aggregate demand through fiscal and monetary policy so as to achieve "full" employment with price "stability".. These ideas about macroeconomic consistency and investment needs also fostered thinking about development planning for developing countries in the United Nations and the World Bank. Indeed, long-run indicative planning was virtually required of developing countries seeking international development assistance.
In developed and developing market economies, the intervention by government in particular sectors was defended in textbooks - and still is - in terms of "externalities", that is to say, factors that private actors would not include in their personal - or in the case of companies, profit - calculations. The government's role was in part to counter this by changing market signals (for example, making pollution costly for polluters) or making markets work better by acting as competition referee (through, say, prohibiting practices deemed unfair and countering monopoly).
In some activities, direct government provision was considered essential.
This was the case, in particular, for "public goodsII like national defence: if protection from invasion was sold in the market, all citizens would benefit whether or not they purchased the service and each person would have a strong incentive to let others pay. The only practical way to provide the service of national defence was thus through the government, as paid for by mandatory taxes.
Governments in market economies also directly undertook certain economic activities when it was believed markets operating on private profit principles would supply them in too-small amounts or to too-limited a range of potential customers, as in agricultural research and extension services or postal services.
While market incentives could stimulate research leading to innovations that would be profitable owing to protection by patents, there would be little incentive for research that improved general knowledge of farming techniques.
Similarly, private postal services would profitably supply high-volume markets, but could not be expected to regularly pick up and deliver mail to every remote corner of a country on a low average-fee basis.
Related to this was the case made in some countries for direct government involvement in particular industries and firms for strategic reasons. Certainly, the petroleum sector had already seen considerable state-enterprise activity in the inter-war years, particularly in Europe and Latin America. The origin of the British Petroleum Company, for example, had lain in the shift of the BritishNavy from coal to oil powered ships. Strategic considerations. also entered into government investment in telecommunication and transportation systems, as well as military procurement, although contracting with private enterprises to undertake work as the government's agent under negotiated agreements was also common.
A more general argument that was sometimes put forth with respect to requiring the State to directly undertake economic activities involved the claim that the time-horizon of profit-oriented business was too short, whereas a Government acting in the national interest would adopt a longer-term perspective.
This was especially the case for industries that required very heavy capital expenditures and, in particular, the natural resource industries. It was thought that private and especially foreign business would not respect the long-term national interest when developing a nation's finite natural resources.
In developing countries, the same argument was extended to the need for the State to take up some part of the role that the private sector would have assumed in developed countries, on the grounds that the developing economies had no comparable entrepreneurial sector or adequately functioning financial markets. Also, the market was said to be too small for the kind of competition discussed in textbooks, so that exploitation by monopoly would prevail.
In all the market economies, the responsibility of government had been extended as well to the provision of a range of social welfare services, transfer payments and pensions (naturally to a far smaller degree in the developing countries, given their lower capacity, than in the developed ones). There were mainly two lines of argument for this, although a third was implicit and was later made a prominent part of the literature. The first was based on equity: while the spare, mathematical formulations of "welfare economics" rigorously demonstrated that the perfectly competitive market economy (were one ever to appear) could be efficient in a well-defined sense, there was nothing in the unfettered operation of markets to render the outcome equitable. Countries differed greatly in what and how much they wished government to do about the inherent inequities of the market system, but some measure of activity involving public programmes and income transfers to the vulnerable and poor appeared to be virtually universaU
However, the equity argument for the existence of government programmes to assist the poor was by itself incomplete. Government activity is coercive (in taxation, if not also in all spending programmes) and it might be argued that private, voluntary organizations instead should be exclusively relied upon to take care of the equity problem and provide social relief. The rebuttal is that coercive financing of social programmes for the poor through taxation is warranted for the same reason that coercive financing for national defence is warranted: many people would rely on others to carry the burden of paying for charity and the level of funding would be too low. In short, there is an economic argument for having a measure of government paternalism.3
The argument for state welfare activity, however, is still incomplete, as Governments do not in the main only reallocate income from taxpayers to the poor or establish spending programmes targeted on the poor - they also establish compulsory social insurance programmes to which the non-poor have to contribute.
The traditional argument has been that, left to themselves, even affluent people make costly mistakes and the government, expressing the will of the majority, has the obligation to help people avoid those mistakes (especially if the government would have to cover the cost of the mistakes, as in the care or even burial - of indigents). Thus, the government prohibits consumption of narcotics and requires participation in national pension schemes.
However, the modern analysis of social welfare policy goes beyond the ultimately unsatisfying paternalistic argument to point out the market failures that warrant a government role in several social policy areas, such as those encompassing unemployment, disability, sickness and other contingency programmes.
These are instances of insurance-market failure, akin to the other market failures noted above. In the case of unemployment insurance, for example, the chances are large that claims would be made in hard-to-predict waves, reflecting the business cycle. This is very different from the typical insurance market, where probabilities of claims can be calculated based on actuarial tables and where the probability that one individual will make a claim is independent of the probability that another will do so. Even where probabilities are independent, other problems can arise. For example, if disability insurance (workers' compensation) were provided on a voluntary, private basis, the insurance company would certainly refuse to insure high-risk occupations,except at high cost. Moreover, even if a voluntary policy with a uniform premium were established in the market, competing insurance companies would offer a cheaper policy to the lower-risk participants, leaving the company offering the uniform premium with the high-risk (and thus high pay-out) cases. Only a mandatory programme avoids this "adverse selection" problem and only a requirement that premiums be paid for all workers keeps the cost manageable.4
Transition to models of a smaller State The model sketched above of the economic and social role of the State in a market economy began to change in some countries even as it was still being developed in others. The modifications took Governments largely in the direction of reduced ambitions for state-directed activity. By the same token, the earlier self-confidence in central planning was eroded, as that system of economic organization experienced growing difficulties in dealing with an increasingly complicated and rapidly changing world. In both cases, optimism about what government could accomplish was tempered by disappointing performance, while the world seemed to be spinning more and more rapidly.
Today, the central planning model of economic organization is rarely advocated; and while socialist goals continue to be advanced in some quarters, most proponents now see decentralized, market processes as the main mechanism for organizing production. Economic planning of the indicative sort is out of fashion and macroeconomic policy has focused on long-run strategies for inflation control and exchange-rate management, as a way to build the confidence of the private sector and encourage investment. Much of the burden of the Keynesian concern about unemployment was thus shifted onto structural adjustment policies for reducing impediments to the smoother operation of labour markets. Governments in developed, developing and transition economies, have sold state enterprises; and the capacity of government to adequately provide basic social services - security, education, succour for the poor, pensions for the elderly - has been sharply questioned in certain countries where popular opinion of the efficacy and cost-effectiveness of many economic and social programmes of government is quite low. In developing and developed economies, non-governmental and voluntary organizations are increasingly taking on social functions that for a time were viewed as mainly the responsibility of the State.
Even at the height of interventionist thinking about the role of the State, however, there were more and less direct approaches to how the State should undertake its economic role. In some countries, for example, public utilities were state enterprises, while in others they were privately owned but were regulated by agencies of the government. At the time, a minority of economists expressed concerns about the costs of regulation (or direct state provision) and asked if the public was really better off being served by inefficient and sometimes compromised regulators or state enterprises as compared with what it had suffered under the predations of the unfettered market. Suspicions about the burden of regulation and intervention spread and by the second half of the 1970s, regulations were eased in specific industries and began to bring lower costs and improved services to customers (dramatically in the case of airline fares and long-distance telephone service in the United States of America).
Tougher questions would henceforth be asked about the degrees and types of government oversight and intervention needed in each specific case.
Correspondingly, the orientation of international trade policy shifted. It had encompassed a mixture of, on the one hand, reduction of the high inter-war tariffs and, on the other hand, continued unilateral and negotiated market restrictions, particularly in sectors of political sensitivity in the countries concerned.
Thus, many developed countries did not apply the rhetoric of trade liberalization to agriculture or textiles. Many developing countries restricted the operations of transnational corporations (TNCs), not least in the extractive sectors.
In addition, producer and consumer Governments negotiated specific international commodity agreements into the 1970s in order to stabilize volatile international prices (only one remains in force today: for natural rubber).
As with domestic investment and regulation policy, however, by the end of the 1970s, the enthusiasm slackened for interventionist trade policies in several developed countries (although protectionist policies have yet to fully disappear from any of the major economies). Instead, there was an increasingly persistent call for liberalization of trade barriers and promotion of foreign direct investment, while Governments were supposed to withdraw from interfering in markets. Activist industrial policies continued to be pursued in certain countries, although with less and less confidence by the 1990s~ Meanwhile, policy makers in many developing countries jettisoned inward-looking state-directed models of development for an export-oriented TNC-integrated model.
The disillusionment with the activist role of government in industrial and trade policy in many countries was paralleled by disappointment with the abil ity of government to guide macroeconomic performance. The 1970s had seen the. collapse of the Bretton Woods system of pegged but adjustable exchange rates, rising inflation and higher unemployment. The seven major developed economies began a sequence of economic summits in the 1970s in order to actively coordinate macroeconomic policy, but by the end of the decade the aims of the annual summits were considerably diluted. 6 Economists initially on the fringe of their profession who questioned the capacity of government to actively manage macroeconomic policy were heard with growing interest by the mainstream.
As the 1980s began, tight monetary policies were instituted to counter the inflation in developed countries, which provoked a major recession in those countries; but when interest rates jumped, this also revealed how vulnerable the high-borrowing large-state strategies of several developing countries had become, especially in Latin America. Debt crises also appeared in certain countries of Eastern Europe, underlining increasing inefficiencies in the centrally planned economies. The perception of the need for reform crept increasingly into the open there too. Indeed, China revolutionized its revolution in 1978, when it turned to a new, more decentralized blueprint for economic organization.
In the developed economies, the arguments for a more limited role of government emphasized the primacy of individual choice over public choice and dissatisfaction with what appeared to have become a cumbersome and incentive dissipating welfare State. In the economics literature, ideas that had been prominent earlier in the 1930s in analyses of large corporations were increasingly applied to the operations of government. It became more common to read about the inability of "principals" (individuals) to adequately monitor their "agents" (representatives of government) in public affairs. "Government failure" arguments were increasingly cited to justify reducing the responsibilities of government in the economy, offering a counter-argument in regard to the traditional "market failure" arguments for government intervention. The new concern also highlighted the "rent-seeking" opportunities that policy interventions created, that is to say, possibilities for turning public policy to private gain, as when policy regulated entry to an industry, and raised the profitability of entry and the incentive for bribery.
Instead of viewing the State as the representative of the public purpose, it was increasingly seen as a predator out to maximize revenues for government operatives or as a machine whose chief purpose was to perpetuate the tenure of office-holders. Even if not compromised, government was often accused of being ineffective. Candidates challenging for the highest offices in several developed and developing countries - joined in the 1990s by transition economies - would successfully run their electoral campaigns by claiming that the incumbents protected entrenched bureaucracies that were out of touch with the needs and wants of the people. They would argue that high taxes had not brought commensurate services. In some cases, military rebellion was welcomed by the citizens for ending "kleptocracy"; in other cases, popular revolt made it impossible for the existing Government to continue to function, until it was finally removed.
If confidence in the efficacy of state economic activity was thus eroded in many countries around the world, an additional factor was frequently pressed into service for limiting the economic ambition of government. This was the increasing globalization of the world economy and the growing belief that countries were in desperate competition for jobs and income. 8 In developed countries in particular, people heard that generous social programmes raised wage costs and rendered workers non-competitive, that taxes had to be lowered to raise profits in order to encourage investment so as to retain (or regain) competitiveness, that rich countries could no longer "afford" indefinite support to the poor, let alone the traditional degree of public support for the arts and culture.
While there seems to have been a large measure of exaggeration in this view, there was also a degree of truth. Prospective demographic trends showed ever-larger shares of retired workers and pointed to coming solvency problems for social pension schemes if existing retirement-income commitments and funding were maintained. More generally, ratios of government debt to gross domestic product (GDP) were rising and the deficits of some countries had become unsustainable. Given a general disaffection with government, the obvious political implication was to cut back government, not raise revenues further.
In the developing countries and in the international development community, comparable questions about the economic efficacy of the State were cast more in terms of how best to rapidly raise incomes and change economic structures.
The debt crisis of the 1980s and two economically disastrous decades in Africa had discredited older policies. Meanwhile, several Asian economies had been quite successful through it all, but why? Explanations for the failure of development ranged from a focus on errors in details of policy design through to cultural analyses of why some countries had inherent entrepreneurship skills and other countries did not, to discussions of the design and capacity of States and the legacy of colonialism. The debates have been highly charged.
Most famously, proponents of minimal government and liberalized policies and supporters of more interventionist policies looked at the same country experiences in Asia and drew very different conclusions. 9 The truth appeared to be somewhere in between, warranting an eclectic and pragmatic approach to industrial policy design. 10
However, as in the developed countries, the rethinking of the economic role of the State in developing countries took place while pressure existed to curtail the operations of government. In this case, such rethinking was frequently in the context of restoring macroeconomic stability and reducing external imbalances after the economy had suffered an economic "shock" from a decline in export prices or an increase in international interest rates. In addition to implementing stabilization policies, large numbers of countries also embarked on a process of structural adjustment and reform, adopting more market-oriented economic policies to promote long-term growth and development.
While the adjustment experiences of countries have been diverse, the common thrust has been to reduce government control of markets and withdraw direct government participation in economic production. ll More recently, emphasis has increasingly been placed on the complementarity between government and private economic activities and the reform of institutions that underpin the functioning of markets, in particular as regards seeking a properly functioning financial sector, adequate infrastructure and fiscal systems.
Coupled with a general shift to more indirect forms of government intervention, this required development of new capacities in administration, regulation and enforcement of rules.
In the centrally planned economies, the debate began with the question how the increasingly deep shortcomings of planned economies could be overcome using market mechanisms as aids to planning ended up with a complete jettisoning of planning in favour of market economy structures. Early rather extreme views about how much could be accomplished through markets were then modified both by recognition of the limits to markets and by growing appreciation of the effort needed to transform the institutions of a planned economy into the institutions of a market economy.
Today, in the second half of the 1990s, a fairly broad area of consensus on the role of the State in the economy - or more precisely, on how to think about the role of the State in the economy - seems to have been reached among policy scholars and policy makers. It begins with the most fundamental and minimal requirement of government on which all agree: establishing and guaranteeing the institutional framework of law, public administration, defence and domestic security (sometimes called the "night watchman" State).
The consensus also recognizes the responsibility for - but also the limits to
- the tools of macroeconomic management.14 Most analysts would let automatic fiscal stabilizers operate to reduce the amplitude of economic recessions, but would do little more under normal cyclical circumstances; nonetheless, they would deploy discretionary fiscal tools if the economy was in a severe downturn.
On the other hand, only rarely do policy makers eschew attempts to stabilize prices through activist monetary policy. However, managing aggregate demand so as to improve employment prospects has largely been abandoned out of fear that unsustainable growth of demand will result. Whether or not this fear is justified, policy makers have been unwilling to take the risk, especially in light of the high cost of squeezing inflation, once begun, out of the system.
Yet this risk aversion, if excessive, also has a cost in forgone income and employment from lower growth of output. In this regard, in short, the consensus does not extend to uniform policy recommendations.
The consensus recognizes that instances of "market failure" are pervasive; for example, even in highly competitive financial markets there are inherent problems of "asymmetric information" between lenders and borrowers that interfere with obtaining the most appropriate allocation of financial resources.
On the other hand, proving the existence of a market failure is no longer considered sufficient demonstration that government intervention is warranted, owing to the many instances of "government failure". This means policy makers need to recognize not only the reasons for, but also the limits to, regulation and controls on markets. In this regard, the consensus is less about what policy measures to take in any particular market situation, than about what questions to ask. The consensus is thus highly sensitive to the institutional context of policy questions, but it also encourages thinking about how institutions should develop.
More generally, the consensus advocates approaching the question of policy intervention in terms more of seeking to work with markets rather than of operating against or without them. There has been considerable analytical work, for example, in trying to design market incentives into environmental policy in contrast to administrative controls, so as to reach, say, a particular level of reduction of pollutants in a cost-effective manner.
Importantly, there is nothing in the new consensus that requires abandoning the redistributional aims of the State, although the actions of some Governments seem to reflect a changing view of the degree of redistribution that the society desires. There also seems to be considerable concern about the disincentive effects and sense of dependency fostered by prolonged income support of the poor and unemployed. There does not seem to be, in other words, a firm view on what constitutes an effective anti-poverty programme, at least in developed economy contexts.
Finally, redistribution issues are increasingly thought of not only in the context of traditional reallocations from the rich to the poor, but also in terms of equity across generations. Government is still the central forum in which to develop a long-run perspective on development, which, inter alia, keeps environmental issues clearly in the agenda. Indeed, development is increasingly defined in a holistic manner, incorporating the entire panoply of actions that are grouped together more and more under the rubric "sustainable development".
H
However large or small Governments see their economic and social role to be, they have to fit the aggregate of their decisions on individual spending programmes within an "envelope" of total budgetary expenditure, governed in turn by the need to finance the expenditure out of government revenues and borrowing.
Principles have long been sought that would determine the limits to the size of the envelope, or at least to the size of the deficit that has to be financed by borrowing; but before such principles can be applied in practice, several complications in government accounting and budgetary measurement have to be sorted out. The first complication is in realizing that almost every government is a collection of public entities and that some degree of decision-making power resides in most of them. Where should one draw the line between the entities that are relevant to the "fiscal position" of the government and those that are not? Once the group of units and activities is decided, which of the various means of accounting and definitions of the deficit should the Government use to set its fiscal envelope? When those questions are resolved, it is possible to posit more precisely what principles to apply in order to determine how large a deficit is too large.
Decision-making on budgets and their financing may be taken at many levels: central or local government may have its own budget; public-sector enterprises may be more or less autonomous (the central bank being a special type of public enterprise); social insurance funds may also have a measure of autonomy.
If the political process were to independently set the budget for each unit, the total impact might not be what policy makers desired. A consolidated accounting is needed to be able to track the net public-sector participation in financial markets and the accumulation of financial claims against the government.
In addition, economists seek to understand and policy makers to guide the impact of the government on total spending in the economy and thus on employment and inflation.
For such analytical purposes, economists and national accounts statisticians typically work with a concept known as general government, which includes the following subsectors: (a) central government; (b) state, provincial and/or regional governments; (c) local governments, such as municipalities and school boards; and (d) social security funds. Data for the general government aim to indicate the overall size of government operations in a country, the allocation of "government" as opposed to private or non-government resources towards various objectives, and the dimension and structure of taxes.
The central government is usually the main channel of the country's fiscal policy and therefore it assumes a special role in economic and monetary analysis.
State, provincial and regional governments with independent financial competence mostly exist in federal countries. The main criterion for considering that an activity is carried out by a separate local government or is under the central government is whether the local unit "has the power to raise a substantial portion of its revenue from sources it controls and its officers are independent of external administrative control in the operation of the unit's activities".19
Social security funds are classified in two, alternative ways. In countries where they are at a rudimentary stage or their management is closely integrated with the government units with which they are associated, they are grouped with such units at each level of government. Alternatively, they are treated as separate subsectors of the general government. However, government social security funds are kept separate from pension funds or other insurance funds that embody agreements between individual employers and employees, which are grouped for statistical purposes as part of the financial sector of the economy.
The general government does not include public enterprises, even when they are entirely owned and controlled by units of government. In between business and government, they engage in commercial activities, but are also instruments of public policy. They are used by Governments to carry out economic and social policy, for example, through their pricing and investment decisions or their financial management activities. However, they are assumed to behave more like private enterprises than government per se and are grouped statistically with the enterprise sector.20 special case One public institution that is usually government-owned and that, like public enterprise, is not classified as part of general government deserves special mention. This is the monetary authority or central bank. It has conventionally been considered not to be a part of general government because of its unique functions of issuing money and linking the domestic to foreign currency systems, but it often engages in fiscal-type activities in both the microeconomic and macroeconomic senses. Especially for the latter reason, the view has spread that the central bank should be considered part of "the government", or more precisely that analysts should focus on a "consolidated" government sector that merges the "general government" and the central bank.
Central-bank microeconomic activities of a fiscal nature, called "quasi-fiscal" activities, may include policies that Governments explicitly wish to undertake as hidden or off-budget expenditures. However, they also include traditional activities that, while being fiscal in nature, were not formerly thought of in fiscal terms, as they are, increasingly, now. These can include lending to the domestic financial sector at below-market - and thus implicitly subsidized interest rates. They also include rescue operations for failing financial institutions, which usually involve some element of subsidy, as when the central bank takes over a portfolio of "bad debt" from a troubled commercial bank in exchange for, say, securities having the same face value but clearly more actual value than the bad debt. Inaddition, when the central bank, as the regulator of the foreign exchange regime, operates a multiple exchange-rate system, it allocates at least some of the foreign exchange to importers of selected goods at favourable (subsidized) exchange rates.
In thesame manner, the central bank undertakes fiscal-type activities when it raises revenues, although the fiscal revenues are usually more in the nature of user fees than taxes. Indeed, provision for collecting these revenues is not adopted as part of the country's tax code and may largely escape the parliamentary approval process that is at the heart of taxation systems. Aside from the explicit fees, such as charges that banks might pay the central bank for operating a deposit insurance scheme, there are several implicit taxes, such as the paying of no interest to banks on their mandated reserve deposits at the central bank. Also, in a multiple exchange-rate system, when the central bank requires that the foreign exchange proceeds from exports of particular items be converted to local currency at a disadvantageous exchange rate, there is an implicit tax. In addition, central banks might require importers to pre-deposit the value of their purchases (as a way to discourage imports) or require foreign investors to make non-interest-bearing deposits when they bring in funds (as a way to discourage speculative inflows). In both cases, the central bank then deprives the owners of the deposits of the opportunity to earn interest (here, then, is the tax element); indeed, the central bank will itself use the funds to purchase interest-bearing securities.
The most fundamental quasi-fiscal operations of the central bank, however, are those that grow out of its central banking role,∑ per se. That is to say, the central bank earns profits from issuing money and it transfers much of these profits directly or indirectly to the government. The indirect transfer is most commonly embodied in savings on interest payments by the government on its debt whenever the government has covered its deficits by issuing bonds to the central bank at below-market interest rates. In such cases, the central bank's income statement would show low profits or even losses owing to the low earnings on its holdings of government debt, although this is really a matter of accounting for transactions between the central bank and the government. In other words, had the bonds carried market interest rates, the central bank would have reported higher income and transferred the difference back to the government as profits.
The main source of central-bank profits is not the quasi-fiscal activities already noted - indeed, these can involve substantial losses22
- but the "seigniorage" that the central bank earns from being the issuer of the national currency.23 As currently used, the term seigniorage is often associated with the "inflation tax", but the monetary authority will earn seigniorage even if there is no inflation. A growing economy needs additional money even if no prices change and the central bank can issue money having real purchasing power at virtually no cost to itself. The typical transaction entails the central bank's buying an interest-bearing asset (a bond, say) from a domestic seller and paying for it with a cheque which, after clearing through the banking system, ends up as some commercial bank's non-interest-bearing deposit in its reserve account at the central bank; hence the seigniorage profit.
It should be clear that if a central bank earns some seigniorage profit when there is no inflation, it will earn more profits when there is some inflation. It might also seem that the greater the inflation, the greater the seigniorage profit, except that the profits are in units of a currency that is depreciating in value because of the inflation. Also, people react to the inflation, especially when inflation is relatively high, by economizing on the domestic money balances they hold (measured in inflation-adjusted terms). In short, there are limits to the capacity of the inflation tax to generate income for the central bank. One authority captured the essence of the analysis in terms of a familiar metaphor: "Since their invention, central banks have served as...the goose that lays the golden eggs. The free-range goose, conducting conservative monetary policy with a fair degree of independence, produces golden eggs worth less than 1 per cent of GNP...The battery-farm goose, bred specially for intensive egg-laying, can produce golden eggs in the form of an inflation tax yielding 5 to 10 per cent of GNP...The force-fed goose can produce revenue of up to 25 per cent of GNP for a limited period before the inevitable demise of the goose and the collapse of the economy...All three forms of central bank geese have been sighted since the 1920s.,,24
Indeed, there is a specific literature on the "optimal inflation tax" which, were central banks operated with the goal of maximizing profits to be transferred to their Governments, would cause great concern to those who have advocated expunging inflation from the world economy.
Nonetheless, some Governments have drawn heavily on seigniorage profits for their financing for considerable periods of time, as may be seen in figure VI. 26 The countries that have tended to rely more heavily on seigniorage taxes have also had the relatively less effective conventional tax collection systems.
One may thus ask if, whenever a country has more than small rates of inflation for sustained periods, it is relying upon the fiscal revenue opportunities from central-bank operations. Certainly, if that is the case, when new monetary policies aim to cut back inflation, they need to be complemented by new fiscal policies so as to replace the seigniorage financing with new tax revenue or reduced expenditures.
There are thus two or three key sets of public-sector activities to group together into fiscal accounts for analytical purposes: (a) the consolidated budget, which groups the general government and the central bank; (b) the general government position, which reflects the activities of government per se; and (c) the central government budget, which is usually the main field of fiscal operations of the national parliament. When Governments seek to mask the true budget situation by moving expenditures "off-budget", it is usually the central government budget that they are distorting. Many off-budget activities would be captured, at least in principle, by the general government budget and even more would be caught by the consolidated government budget. Nevertheless, depending principles under which the fiscal accounts were drawn up, some fiscal activities might still escape all of these fiscal groupings.
Private companies frequently use different sets of accounts for different reporting requirements. One set would follow the rules for recognizing income and expenditures for purposes of calculating company income tax liabilities. A second set might follow the rules required for reporting profits and declaring dividends to shareholders. A third set might be used for management decisions.
In a similar fashion, Governments typically keep different sets of accounts for different purposes. Most Governments calculate their fiscal position one way for parliamentary budgeting requirements and a second way as part of their national accounts statistics. The deficit or surplus under these two systems carries different information. There is also a third set of accounts, however, which gives an additional perspective and, if more broadly employed, would help improve public decision-making.
Government "fl,n,an,ce approach From the perspective of parliamentary fiscal control, where the bottom line consists in authorizing the treasury to borrow the funds needed to cover expenditures and obligations, the fiscal balance on a cash basis has been the standard approach to government accounting. This indicator of the fiscal situation shows the gap between total cash received by the government (but excluding proceeds from borrowing) and cash paid out (the total of lending by the government minus repayments to the government and government expenditure, including interest payments, but excluding amortization of the government's own debt). When negative, this balance shows the government's net borrowing requirement. 27 Consequently, it shows the change in the government's indebtedness owing to its operations during the fiscal year. This has also been the basic measure of fiscal balance in A Manual on Government Finance Statistics issued in 1986 by the International Monetary Fund (IMF).28
One characteristic of this measure is that the government's lending and borrowing are treated asymmetrically. The Manual groups government lending with expenditure; in other words, it is "above the line" and affects the size of the deficit or surplus, whereas government borrowing is shown "below the line" (as a means of financing the deficit). Such treatment occurs in order to place all transactions that the government undertakes to achieve its policy goals above the line, while what is borrowed to finance the policy is below the line.29
On the basis of this principle, one might expect to see grants received by the government (for example, official development assistance) as part of the financing, but they are instead shown above the line in the standard presentation.
The reason is that grants, as unrequited transfers, do not increase government debt. In some cases, however, Governments also measure their deficit before grants, especially when the grants are a large part of the government's general resources and cannot be assumed to be available indefinitely. 30
In practice, the borderline dividing deficit-determining and deficit-financing categories is flexible. Governments carrying out essentially the same fiscal policies may report different budget balances owing to differences in how they categorize particular transactions. In addition, despite the common framework of the Manual, national budgetary and accounting practices vary significantly.
Consequently, analysts need to supplement the summary measure of the cash deficit with other indicators when analysing a country's fiscal position.
As already noted, all transactions under this treatment are presented on a cash basis; that is to say, they are recorded only at the time payment occurs.
Besides, only transactions in which cash is the medium of exchange are involved. This is the most widely accepted concept of budgetary balance, but it has its limitations. 31 The inclusion of one-off items (such as privatization proceeds, temporary taxes and savings from a temporary pay-freeze for civil servants) may give a distorted signal in respect of the underlying trends in revenue and spending. Also, under this system, a government might improve its perceived short-term fiscal position by "creative financing", such as guaranteeing additional borrowing by state enterprises instead of increasing direct subsidies to them or shifting deficit financing from bonds with standard semiannual interest coupons to zero-coupon bonds that pay all interest when the bond matures. In these cases, cash budgeting would not take account of payment obligations that a government had assumed but not yet actually paid.
National accounts n.n,u∑."...",h.
A second approach to economic accounting for Government is contained in the System of National Accounts (SNA), which looks at government activity in the context of domestic production and use of aggregate output. This approach recasts government transactions into categories that affect GDP, income and other macroeconomic aggregates. In practice, the government accounts in the SNA are generally estimated by making adjustments to the cash accounts prepared for the government finance statistics.
The most important adjustment is the SNA's giving a symmetric treatment to both lending and borrowing. It excludes net lending for policy purposes from government expenditure and regards it instead as financing, thereby placing it below the line. As noted above, government finance statistics treat net lending by government as if it were part of expenditure. The reason for the difference is that the SNA "draws the line" so that the amount below the line shows the net call of each sector (government, households and so forth) on the domestic and foreign resources of the rest of the economy. It measures, in other words, the sector's net lending or borrowing.
Corresponding to these different flow perspectives are different views of the stock situation. From a policy perspective, it is important in determining how financially exposed a government is, to know how its financial assets compare with its debt: this draws attention to the net asset position. At the same time, the treasury also wants to know the relative size of the government in the financial markets, which may be seen from the level of gross government debt. It is not that one measure is more important or revealing than the other; they serve different purposes.
Government accounts in the SNA also differ from the accounts under the Manual for government finance statistics in that the former exclude from deficitdetermining items the transactions that involve changes in ownership of existing assets and liabilities and that therefore do not contribute to current income and production. These concern, for instance, deposit insurance outlays as well as asset sales, such as privatization receipts. Both cases involve rearrangements of assets already present in the economy and not part of new production.
The SNA approach differs from the government finance statistics approach in one additional important way - all transactions are recorded on an accrual basis in the SNA: "Accrual accounting records flows at the time economic value is cteated, transformed, exchanged, transferred or extinguished", irrespective of when payment is made or received.32 Thus, economic activity is recorded at the time the activity occurs and all transactions, whether in cash or in kind, are recorded.
The advantage of accrual accounting is that it gives a picture not only of what has been paid or received, but also of what is in the pipeline or owed. In this regard, the arrears on payments by the government are of particular concern.
When a government accumulates arrears, the cash-based measure of fiscal balance underestimates the government's need to call on financial resources. Also, by definition, cash accounting does not record non-cash revenuesand expenses such as depreciation or, very significantly, changes in pension liabilities. Depreciation represents a consumption of the government's capital through use. There is no cash payment, but a real economic cost has been incurred. By the same token, the build-up of pension liabilities represents a real claim on government,33 In both cases, supplementary statistics are needed in a cash accounting system to keep track of these developments.
Although the theory of accrual accounting is thus strong, it is not easily applied in practice to government. According to one study, most countries mainly make timing adjustments (as opposed to wide-scale adjustments, 32 33 including non-cash items) to cash-based accounting data for the general government sector. As a result, the measured differences between overall budget data recorded on cash and accrual bases are generally not large, although adjustments for individual items vary from less than 1 to 13 per cent of their unadjusted value:4
In the area of tax collection, the amounts accrued and actually paid may differ greatly. The problem is not knowing how much of the accrued taxes will eventually be paid. Here, the recommendation of the SNA itself is a compromise.
Regarding the measurement of taxation revenue, the 1993 SNA said, "it may be preferable for analytic and policy purposes to ignore unpaid tax liabilities and confine the measurement of taxes within the System to those actually paid. Nevertheless, the taxes actually paid should still be recorded on an accrual basis at the times at which the events took place which gave rise to the liabilities";5
Despite these difficulties, a number of countries have adopted or plan to adopt accrual accounting as the standard form for presenting their government financial reports. Indeed, the possible change of the recording basis is among the most important issues in the planned revision of the 1986 Manual. Even so, this will still be far from the comprehensive balance-sheet approach advocated by many government finance experts.
Balance-sheet approacfl The balance-sheet approach attempts to address many of the same shortcomings in the cash accounts approach and in the SNA approach (indeed, the 1993 SNA includes a full set of balance sheets that correspond to the flow accounts). The questions arising from the balance-sheet approach are a consequence of adapting to government the standard model of accounting for an enterprise. In this regard, the balance-sheet approach seeks to calculate the "net worth" of the government at a particular point in time (say, the beginning of the fiscal year). The net worth is calculated as the sum of the government's financial and real assets minus the sum of its financial and real liabilities. In this case, the fiscal deficit "would be equivalent to the dissaving (reduction in the net worth) of government in any year. Like the net worth of a firm, the net worth of a government is specified in its balance sheet, and the overall fiscal deficit in any period is equal to the difference in: balance sheets at the beginning and end of the period".36 The public-sector balance sheet should include not only marketable financial assets and liabilities, but also the value of its physical capital stock, the value of government-owned land and mineral rights, and the present value of planned tax revenues, as well as the present value of social insurance and other entitlement obligations.31
Net worth concepts of fiscal deficit, however, are in their infancy. So far, there have been only a few attempts to estimate (or even approximate) government net worth.3B A complete set of data for such an exercise is unavailable in most countries. Indeed, even government balance sheets on a SNA basis contain only a subset of assets and liabilities. They do not include, for example, land, mineral rights, government taxing power, or contingent liabilities.
Besides, the jury is still out on how to value some of the government's assets; for example, what is the value of the government's power to tax and spend?39
To date, only the Government of New Zealand, has introduced a full balance sheet presentation of its fiscal accounts. In implementing its new system,
New Zealand has had to make compromises, particularly in the valuation of assets and liabilities, as it is difficult to ascribe prices to many items. For this reason, no valuation has been put on, for instance, the Government's taxing power. Moreover, the picture shown by the overall balance, as well as its interpretation, is still far from clear (see box VI).
Notwithstanding valuation, measurement and other problems, the balance sheet approach provides a useful tool for analysis and policy design, as it helps assess the sustainability and operating implications of government fiscal policy.
For instance, cutting capital expenditure while government assets keep on depreciating reduces the capacity of government to provide its services. Only the balance-sheet approach shows this clearly. Furthermore, privatizing state-owned assets is seen in these accounts as the exchange of one asset, the state enterprise, for another asset, cash. By the same token, under this type of accounting, shifting social contributions between different accounts will simply net out.
The above notwithstanding, reliance solely on calculations of the fiscal balance as the change in net worth as shown on a government balance sheet could hardly be expected. First, net worth - and thus the government deficit or surplus
- could sharply fluctuate as a result of normal valuation changes in assets and liabilities. Second, given the very low probability that some government physical assets will ever be sold, the valuation of those assets has to be almost notional. Thus, the balance-sheet approach is able to show∑ only broad trends in government fiscal position and in practice would mainly complement conventional fiscal measures for the conduct of fiscal policy. Nevertheless, the balance-sheet approach provides information that is not readily available under conventional cash-based accounting and that can be very instructive.
The "d,,,t,,,,t" in fiscal deficit As we have seen, the focus in standard government finance statistics was on linking the annual operations of the government with its implications for the government's borrowing and thus for the change in its debt. The national accounts approach, in contrast, insisted on the symmetry between the government's financial assets and its debt; in that accounting system, the fiscal balance showed how much the net financial asset position would change owing to the deficit as the SNA defined it. The balance-sheet approach drew attention to the "net worth" of the government, including the value of its non-financial assets and obligations and defined the deficit as the change in net worth within a fiscal year. However, if the country was experiencing a substantial rate of inflation, each of these measures would give a misleading picture of the deficit; and the size of the deficit in each case would depend in part on where the country was in its short-term business cycle. Furthermore, fiscal "effort", in the sense of trying to foster government saving, cannot be readily determined from any of these measures.
Inflation can distort the fiscal accounts in various ways, but the most dramatic effects are in the financial elements of the accounts, particularly in the interest payments on public debt. Owing to this factor, even using the same fiscal deficit measure to compare fiscal positions across countries having differIn July 1994, New Zealand's Fiscal Responsibility Act entered into force and revolutionized government accounting. The Government had been undertaking public-sector reforms for several years and the new accounts were meant to bolster the ability of legislators and the general public to interpret Government budget trends, proposals and priorities.
New Zealand's government accounts had previously been a variant of the standard international approach, which, it was said, gave rise to the concern "that when considering the need for additional expenditure on specific activities, the negative economic
.impact of fiscal deficits was usually too easily discounted"." Under the new law, the Government is required, inter alia, to publish comprehensive fiscal forecasts, report performance information and revise its outlook on aregular basis, and prepare all fiscal reports in accordance with Generally Accepted Accounting Practice (GAAP) - a set of rules approved by the New Zealand Accounting Standards Review Board and commonly used by private companies.
New Zealand's new financial statements are more business-like in terms of both information reported and timeliness. Information on the Government's fiscal position and its changes are quickly released and can be analysed by the press and the general public, especially by those who are familiar with business accounting, particularly the financial sector. Indeed, the new accounts include a balance sheet and the government-finance counterpart to an income statement, called the "operating statement", as well as a statement of cash flows that is conceptually close to what the traditional fiscal accounts sought to measure. The new accounts, however, consolidate the Reserve Bank of New
.Zealand (the central bank) and other entities into the data, whereas the older accounts pertained only to the central Government.
The major indicator of the Government's fiscal position is now the "operating balance", the difference between revenues and expenses .in the operating statement. Data are recorded on an accrual basis and include non-cash flows, the most important of which are depreciation, and unrealized foreign exchange gains or losses, as well as changes in the liabilities for public employee pensions, changes in working capital and changes in the valuation of forests owned by the Crown.b The operating balance directly links with the balance sheet by adding to or reducing assets or liabilities. The balance sheet itself includes both financial and non-financial assets (such as land, buildings, roads and military equipment) and unfunded pension liabilities of public employees. o The difference that the new approach makes can be appreciated by a comparison of the fiscal activity accounts for one year under both the old and the new system, which the Government facilitated by continuing to prepare both sets of accounts for a three-year period. Under the traditional system (as per the IMF presentation of the accounts), New Zealand had a small surplus of almost 0.1 billion New Zealand dollars ($NZ) in fiscal 1992/93 (see table). More precisely, this was the balance of the central Government.
However, the consolidated deficit from government operations was NZ$ 0.8 billion, while the consolidated net cash flow was a deficit of NZ$ 1.3 billion.
The striking difference between the traditional fiscal deficit and the balance on net cash flow arose mainly from the difference between central government and consolidated government accounts. In other words, the central government fiscal deficit gave a misleading picture of the net increase in claims on the entire Government, which had not been nil but rather had risen by about 1.6 per cent of GOP.
It is also of interest that for the consolidated government, the deficit on net cash flow was larger than the net operating deficit, which was about 1. per cent of GOP, not 1.6 per cent. Here the difference arose largely from the difference between cash and accrual accounting. In essence, beginning with the deficit on net cash flows, if one added all the non-cash accrued costs and subtracted all the accrued income, one would get the operational deficit. In this case, total accrued non-cash income was larger than total accrued non-cash costs and thus the operational deficit was smaller than the cash deficit.d Such, in any event, are the kinds of factors to which the new system explicitly draws attention. ent inflation rates would be unreliable. Even if countries used the same deficit definitions, had similarly high inflation rates and were otherwise identical, the measured deficits could be significantly different if they used different types of bonds to finance their deficit. 40
This distortion arises because as inflation rates rise, nominal interest rates rise to compensate bondholders for the loss in the purchasing power of the money they have lent the government. In other words, if the annual interest rate had been 10 per cent (had there been no inflation) and if the annual inflation rate is 40 per cent, then the actual interest rate will be about 50 per cent.
The standard bond pays the holder the face value at maturity and thus after one year of 40 per cent inflation the bondholder will have an asset whose purchasing power has lost 40 per cent of its value. An interest payment of 40 per cent, however, would compensate for that loss and thus one way to sell bonds in a high-inflation environment is to make the interest rate adjustable and keyed to a shorter-term domestic rate which will change to reflect inflation changes.
In the above example, the full 50 per cent interest payment is considered part of expenditures from an accounting perspective, although one could say that four fifths of this was not really interest at all. It was a payment that maintained the real value of the debt and it is more like amortization or the incur ring of an additional loan; in other words, it is actually part not of the interest expense, but of the financing. Moreover, if the bond were indexed to the rate of inflation so that its face value rose over time to maintain its real value, the interest rate on the bond would remain at 10 per cent of the initial face value and the interest expense would not rise. The government's nominal obligations would rise by the same 40 per cent as a result of the indexing, but the accounting treatment would be different. Thus, if a country uses indexed bonds in an inflationary environment, it will show smaller deficits than if it uses floatingrate bonds.
To take account of the impact of inflation on interest expenditures, the notion of "operational balance" has been devised. Conceptually, this is the conventional cash-flow fiscal deficit with the effect of inflation on interest payments removed. In practice, there are technical complications in estimating the amount of inflation-induced interest payments that should be deducted.
Nevertheless, estimates show the effect to be potentially dramatic in high inflation environments, as some of the examples in table V.I indicate. In most cases, the fact that the "operational" deficit is smaller than the conventional deficit implies that the amount of fiscal correction needed to balance the fiscal accounts is smaller than indicated by the conventional deficit, assuming that fiscal correction is part and parcel of an anti-inflationary stabilization plan.41
Moreover, if a country with a high deficit and high inflation begins to reduce the inflation rate, this will quickly be reflected in lower budget deficits. By the same token, in later years when the inflation rate is relatively low, further reductions in the deficit will have to come from real spending and revenue raising activities.
Given the importance and yet the complexity of the operational cash deficit concept, a simpler method of abstracting from the interest-payment/inflation phenomenon is frequently used. This measure, called the "primary balance", is simply the standard cash-flow fiscal balance excluding government interest payments in the expenditure data. It is readily calculated from the standard presentation of government finance statistics. It is a measure of fiscal balance that is independent of the debt-servicing burden, which is an exogenously determined cost to the government and in many cases has been inherited from an earlier administration. Table V.l shows examples of this measure as well.
Calculating the primary deficit can thus shed light on some fiscal phenomena.
Others, however, have to be addressed with different fiscal concepts.
Short-term fluctuations in economic activity can significantly obscure underlying trends in the budget. An economic downturn automatically worsens the deficit because of lower tax revenue and extra benefits for unemployment compensation and other programmes. Conversely, a shrinking budget deficit during the recovery from recession may give a misleadingly rosy picture of the government fiscal position. This pattern calls for a budget indicator that distinguishes between the change in the government's budget balance that was the result of policy actions and the change induced by fluctuations in economic activity.
Different methods have been developed to make that adjustment. All share one common feature: they estimate the budget balance that would exist if some reference set of economic conditions prevailed. The early attempts to estimate the structural component of the budget deficit date back to the 1940s when the concept of "full-employment" - later "standardized-employment" - budget balance was developed in the United States. The full-employment budget surplus or deficit "measures what would be the budget position if the economy were at full employment and the legislated tax and spending structures were in effect".42 The standardized-employment deficit is defined as "a measure of the imbalance in the budget that would exist if the economy were operating at capacity and tax collections and spending for such purposes as unemployment compensation reflected that robust economy".
Since then, various methods have been developed and are now regularly employed by OECD, IMF and many Governments. For instance, in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the Government uses a measure called the "control total" in short-term policy analysis. This is derived by subtracting from total spending interest on government debt and cyclical social security benefits (including unemployment benefits, job-seekers' allowances and income support paid to people of working age); these items "are most affected by cyclical factors and are therefore not subject to government expenditure policy in the short term".44
No single method, however, is universally accepted for defining the structural deficit and it is often difficult statistically to distinguish cyclical from underlying elements of the fiscal accounts. The most widely used measures ask what the deficit would have been if GDP had been at the level given by its trend rate of growth or if the economy had reached its estimated "potential output"
- an extension of the full-employment concept. The trend-output measure is the most simple: it is derived by "smoothing" actual GDP growth over an economic cycle to find the average rate of growth and then determining what GDP would have been in the budget year being studied if it had grown at its trend rate since the beginning of the cycle.45
The simplicity of the trend-output approach, however, is also the reason that it is increasingly being abandoned for the potential-output approach. That is, the trend-output approach begs important but difficult questions about the rate of technical progress or the "natural" rate of unemployment. It is also rather mechanical: it does not depend on any model of how the economy works, does not address structural limitations and does not consider whether adequate supplies of key factors of production would have been available to realize the trend-output growth rate for the duration of the cycle. For such reasons, OECD decided to shift to a potential output measure in its macroeconomic studies.46
The potential output benchmark as defined by IMF, a long-time proponent of this method, is "the maximum sustainable level of economic activity that is consistent with stable inflation" .47 Calculations of potential output employ an econometric production function to estimate output that would result from fully employing the capital stock and available labour inputs and assuming a continuation of the trend growth in productivity. The level of labour resources chosen is that estimated to be consistent with the "non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment" (NAIRU).
Once potential output is estimated, measuring the structural deficit requires breaking down government revenues and expenditures into cyclical and structural components. This is accomplished through a combination of adjustments of revenues and expenditures in proportion to the difference between actual GDP and potential GDP and adjustments governed by estimated income elasticities for selected spending and revenue components. As estimated by OECD, tax revenue changes are much more significant than those for expenditure and account for about 80-90 per cent of the total adjustment.48
The usefulness of the concept of structural deficit is well illustrated by one of the Maastricht criteria for entry into the single-currency area of the Economic and Monetary Union (EMU), namely, a ceiling of 3 per cent of GDP on the permissible budget deficit by 1997 (see box Y.2 below). In the late 1980s, there were two reasons why that target might have seemed attainable for many European Union (EU) countries. First, for the EU as a whole, the 1989 deficit was only 2.5 per cent of GDP and represented the culmination of a pattern of almost continuously falling deficits since 1982 (see figure Y.2). Of course, this figure was an average and not every country in the EU had such a low deficit in 1989.
Even though most countries then ran higher deficits in 1990 and 1991 than in 1989, these data suggested that a 3 per cent deficit would be largely attainable in the target year, 1997, especially if the region were not in recession.
However, the challenge that the EU set for itself with this target can be seen more clearly in terms of the structural budget deficit. This was never less than 3.6 per cent of potential GDP for the EU as a whole in the 1980s and it had not been on a strongly declining trend. Moreover, the actual deficit was smaller than the structural deficit each year from 1988 to 1991, indicating that EU was producing above "capacity". Inflation was high by the standards of those years (about 5 per cent per year) and unemployment was relatively low by European standards (about 8 per cent). Then, with the accession of the eastern Lander (States) to the Federal Republic of Germany and other developments in the region, the structural deficit of the EU jumped to about 5 per cent of potential When the European Union embarked on the creation of a single-currency area in Europe and the replacement of several of the world's major currencies with the "Euro", it also decided to set restrictions on the macroeconomic conditions and policies of countries that would become members of the new currency area. As sUGh, the Maastricht Treaty on European Union contained convergence criteria for Economic and Monetary Union (EMU), including a stringent application of the concept of sustainable fiscal deficits. Fearing that EMU without economic convergence might be fragile and a source of tension, European Community (EC) Governments agreed in the Treaty to include four convergence criteria (the specific reference values of the criteria were contained in a protocol annexed to the Treaty). Satisfying the criteria is necessary in order to join EMU and members violating these limits - at least the fiscal ones - will incur penalties. The first three requirements are related to inflation rates, interest rates and exchange rates." The fourth requirement refers to fiscal policies and specifies limits on both fiscal deficits and government debt. The general government deficit must not exceed 3 per cent of GOP and public debt must not exceed 60 per cent of GOP at the start of EMU.
While the first three rules are rather strict, the fiscal criteria do nonetheless contain some flexibility, because the deficit concerned is the fiscal cash deficit, unadjusted for cyclical influences or the effects of unforeseen shocks. The Treaty also allowed room for political negotiation on the entry of individual countries. According to article 104c of the Treaty, a deficit above 3 per cent may be acceptable if "it is exceptional and temporary and the ratio remains close to the reference value" or if it "has declined substantially and continuously and reached a level that comes close to the reference value". Similarly, a debt-to-GOP ratio of over 60 per cent may be admitted if it is "diminishing and approaching the reference value at asatisfactory rate".
The reference value of 60 per cent for debt was close to the average ratio of debt to GOP for the countries that composed the EC when the Treaty was drafted in 1991 (61.7 per cent), while the 3 per cent deficit limit was below the 1991 average deficit of 4.3 per cent of GOP. However, both targets seemed within reach." A possible inspiration for these rates was the "golden rule of public finance"," postulating that current expenditure should be covered by current revenue and that only capital expenditure should be financed by borrowing. As it happens, EC public investment averaged almost exactly 3 per cent of GOP during the period 1974-1991.
In applying these criteria, the boundaries of the public sector had to be decided.
European Governments perform operations that in other countries are associated with the non-government sector, including through public enterprises, public financial institutions, and public administrative/non-profit agencies. Conversely, non-government actors have taken on quasi-governmental functions. d Moreover, these divergences from traditional roles usually arise from country-specific circumstances which render cross-country comparisons of the government deficit more difficult.
The European Commission explicitly provided that the European System of Integrated Economic Accounts would establish the guidelines for "drawing the line" around what was to be included in general government, as the term was employed in the Treaty of Maastricht, and consequently would determine the scope and the coverage of the public sector that were relevant for measuring the public deficit and debt. The essential difficulty isthat the structure of government finances is evolving much faster than the statistical systems to measure them. The European System of Integrated Economic Accounts was drafted in 1979 and though a new system was agreed in 1995, it will not be introduced until 1999 because it could change the size of some countries'
GOP, thereby distorting budget calculations.
Meanwhile, the 1979 system does not cover economic changes that have occurred in the past 15 years. For example, it has become harder to determine whether pension benefits or insurance schemes represent a "state expense" or a "private expense", particularly since some of these schemes are partly self-funding and non-universal.
Statistical guidelines also leave Governments enough room to make accounting interpretations that other Governments might not make. The Statistical Office of the European Communities (Eurostat} is empowered, however, to take an official position on such data issues, after consultation with the European Committee on Monetary, Financial and Balance of Payments Statistics (made up of representatives from national statistical institutes and national central banks of EU member countries). A particularly delicate area is represented by the privatization of state assets. While Eurostat has taken the position that privatization should not be used to boost finances, some Governments have relied on this measure to lower the deficit.
Adherence to some set of fiscal restrictions is thought essential to the operation of EMU, given how it was designed, namely, as a unified single-currency area with a relatively small central budget and many large national government systems. In other words, there has been concern that excessive deficits in one member country could create negative spillovers for the others. At the extreme, an individual country's fiscal crisis could lead to the invocation of the "no bail-out clause": which would be politically as well as financially disruptive; but even before such a crisis point was reached, a Government would have to finance a large budget deficit by borrowing on the financial markets and, if done excessively, this would raise interest rates. In other words, because the financial markets within EMU could become as integrated as the markets in the different States of the United States of America, the higher interest rates in one country would spread throughout the currency area (at least if the high-deficit country was a large one) and crowd out private investment elsewhere in the Union.
Certainly, Governments joining EMU would be giving up one traditional source of fiscal revenue, namely seigniorage, as they would no longer have a national money. They would also lose the option of an "inflation tax" to escape from an unsustainable deficit situation. However, as would not be the situation in a strong federal system, the citizens of a country in EMU with astrong recessionary economic shock would receive relatively little in the way of automatic-stabilizer transfers from the centre. States in the United States do not operate fiscal policies and do not need to. Countries in EMU will have very limited opportunity to employ fiscal policy, but may someday need it.'
GDP through 1994.
EU countries have pushed their deficits down sharply since 1995 (see figure V.2), and OECD's December 1996 forecast suggested that the Union as a whole would make the grade (as would almost every country) if the Maastricht budget criterion for 1997 were the structural deficit. However, the same OECD forecast pointed to less of a success for the EU as a whole (and relatively few countries were expected to pass the test) using the conventional deficit indicator .
One should not rush to criticize the authors of the Maastricht Treaty, however, for not adopting the structural deficit for their budget criterion. There is a considerable amount of theory and econometrics contained in the estimation of the structural budget position, and thus there is also considerable room for error, for misspecifying the impact of different GDP levels on budget items and, most significantly, for misspecifying the economic model of the economy.
Even if the fundamental structure of the model were accepted, this approach would have the drawback that the specific econometric relations in the model are derived from past data. The implicit assumption that the economy continues to work as it did in the past is sometimes simply invalid. For example, the NAIRU for the United States has for years been confidently estimated at 6 per cent, whereas unemployment in the United States has been 5.5 per cent or less for over a year and inflation has remained relatively low and not shown signs of increasing.49 Estimates of "potential GDP" for the United States that employed the conventional NAIRU estimate would thus have underestimated potential GDP and overestimated the structural budget deficit.
:'''"11,'''''''" and ilUJestin,t{
Fiscal accounting helps policy makers ensure that government operates responsibly and that when the government borrows it does so at a sustainable pace and in an appropriate manner. The adjustments to the measured deficit discussed above either altered interest payments owing to the effect of high inflation or modified different categories of spending and revenue owing to cyclical movements of GDP. The goal in both cases was to produce a more reliable measure of the overall fiscal deficit and thus of present and future borrowing needs. However, fiscal policy is about more than just "sound" budgeting; there is also concern about the composition of spending and revenues. In a development context, in particular, there is a deep concern about government saving and investment. A different budget measure is needed to track performance in that regard.
The standard measure of this is the "current fiscal balance", also called government saving or "own saving". This puts all current expenditures and revenues above the line and all investment and "capital revenues" (such as proceeds from selling government assets) below the line,50 and provides a measure of the government's contribution to national saving. The current balance concept recognizes that investment spending is different in nature from current spending. Unlike current spending, public investment is assumed to generate income, sometimes directly but usually indirectly, as by providing infrastructure that raises the rate of GDP growth.
The recognition of the different natures of current and capital spending has led to the formulation of the so-called golden rule of public finance: balance the current budget and borrow no more than the amount of gross public-sector capital formation. This is based on the assumption that "public sector capital generates real revenue that is sufficient to cover its interest cost". 51 Hence, borrowing to pay for capital expenditure is effectively self-financing under this assumption. It also distributes the cost of the investment among the beneficiaries, today and in the future, rather than ask present taxpayers to fully pay for the services that future taxpayers will receive from the construction in the present of roads, bridges, sewers and so on.
However, the distinction between current and capital spending is not always easy to draw. Current spending in several standard categories - such as for health and education - may be very productive in the same sense as physical capital formation; that is to say, these forms of spending all raise labour productivity.
However, Governments do not generally have a human capital development budget. Conversely, one can find examples of unproductive public investment projects. Moreover, debt incurred for public investment still has to be serviced and so the golden rule does not free Governments from the obligation to raise revenues in the future to service the incremental debt; in effect, the government has to appropriate enough of the returns from the public-sector investment (for example, increase in GDP) to cover the cost of the borrowing.
This depends on the income elasticity of its tax system or on the programming of revenue enhancement measures when the investment decisions are taken. suß,tainaJhle deficit Economics as a discipline has no general prescription for the appropriate level of public debt or for the ratio of public debt to GDP. There are sound reasons for public debt not to be zero. At a minimum, short-term government borrowing allows the timing of government expenditures to differ from the timing of receipts of tax revenues without requiring the government to maintain large average bank balances. At the same time, a market in government bills (the financial instruments for short-term government borrowing) provides a useful, relatively risk-free tool for cash management in the banking and enterprise sectors. In addition, the golden rule argument above has suggested that it is appropriate to finance some government expenditures with long-term bonds and these instruments provide a useful, risk-free vehicle for savings.
Thus, the ratio of government debt to GDP should be greater than zero, but "we do not have any theories that predict a precise upper limit for debt ratios". 52All that can be said with certainty is that if the ratio of public debt to GDP rises rapidly enough over a sufficiently long period, then eventually the government will become unable to continue to fully service the debt and will have to repudiate at least some of it (sometimes repudiation is through outright default; often it is through inflationary reduction of the value of bonds).53
The logic of the analysis can be seen in the following equation: d' = p + (r-n)d where d is the ratio of consolidated public debt to GDP, d' is the change in that ratio in one year, p is the ratio of an augmented primary deficitto GDP, ris the annual domestic real rate of interest, and n is the annual rate of growth of real GDP. The augmented primary deficit is the standard primary deficit reduced by seigniorage revenues and earnings on official foreign reserves plus or minus the domestic currency value of the interest differential between foreign currency and domestic public debt. 54 The equation may be interpreted as saying, first, that the growth of the debt depends on the size of the augmented primary deficit, which is that part of government expenditure that exceeds all revenues and needs to be financed by new borrowing; second, that growth of the debt/GDP ratio depends on the rate of interest on already outstanding public debt; and, finally, that while the debt/GDP ratio is made larger by the growth of the debt, it is made smaller by the growth of GDP.
The equation shows, in other words, that the evolution of the debt ratio depends on two main factors: the augmented primary deficit and the difference between the real interest rate and the real GDP growth rate. If the GDP growth rate is greater than the real interest rate, then this will tend to erode the ratio of debt to GDP and there would be room to maintain primary deficits. There have been essentially two types of examples of this relationship. First, it has been the case for some of the rapidly growing economies of Asia, although in the long run their growth rate is expected to slow and ultimately fall below the real interest rate. Second, it was a common phenomenon among many countries in the 1970s and 1980s, when high inflation rates produced negative real interest rates. After inflation was firmly attacked, real interest rates rose and the relationship ceased to hold.
In the long run, in other words, it is expected that the real interest rate will exceed the growth rate of GDP. If the government sought to stabilize the debt/GDP ratio, it would have to ensure that a surplus was run in the augmented primary balance. The primary balance itself would not need to be in surplus if the net contribution to financing from seigniorage and the other augmenting elements was positive, but there would certainly still be a limit to the sustainable primary deficit; in other words, Governments face a definite solvency constraint.
Knowing that there is a solvency constraint, however, is not the same as being able to specify what it is. Some authors have inserted assumed or projected values for GDP growth, real interest rates, government spending and revenues into equations like the one shown above in order to make assessments of fiscal sustainability. Others have noted that the key elements in the equation are not independent; in particular, private saving and investment interact with public policies to determine the paths of interest rates and economic growth. 51 Thus, fully specifying whether a country's budget outlook satisfies the solvency constraint entails specifying a complete macroeconomic model for the country, including a fairly detailed model of the government sector.
In an even more complicated approach, called "generational accounting", some economists have posed the fiscal sustainability issue in a different way.
The idea, attractive enough in the abstract, is that current fiscal deficits should not impose undue tax burdens on future generations.58 The difficulty is in deciding what is "undue" and how large the actual burden is likely to be. Not only must there be a full model of how the economy operates over a long period (including estimates of future growth of productivity), but fairly strict assumptions are needed about household behaviour. A basic assumption made in such analyses is that the public debt should be fully paid off at the end of the stated future time period, when in fact each generation may wish to bequest some riskfree wealth (government bonds) to the next one. Depending on which assumption is used, current deficits may be found to be sustainable or unsustainable.59
The complexity of estimating the maximum sustainable deficit does not, of course, relieve Governments of having to decide on the size of the deficit. This perforce leads to simpler policy rules, such as the ones adopted as the Maastricht criteria for government debt and deficit levels needed to gain admission to EMU in 1999 (see box Y.2). Sometimes an even more cautious rule-of-thumb might be adopted, such as the United States Government target for reaching a zero federal deficit by the year 2002.
By the same token, when countries adopt macroeconomic adjustment programmes with the support of IMF, a coordinated set of policy measures is agreed, generally including targets for reduction of fiscal deficits. When the financial adjustment programme begins, it is usually clear whether the fiscal deficit is excessive. However, the necessary extent of fiscal contraction is, as argued above, not clear-cut and, indeed, until recently the inclusion of analyses of fiscal sustainability in IMF programme documents was infrequent.GO This was largely owing to the difficulties inherent in such analyses and the frequently highly judgemental nature of the standards for fiscal sustainability.
The preceding chapter (chapter V) leads to the conclusion that the role of government in a market economy is being thought about today in the academic and policy literature in a more nuanced way than before. The boundaries are still not sharp between the activities that economists think government must undertake and those that they think it might undertake or believe it should eschew, but the questions that can he posed to decision makers in making the choices are sharper than they were in earlier decades. Also, general policy analysis does little more than narrow the range of overall budget positions that economies can sustain over the long run, leaving considerable room for choices from among sets of feasible spending and revenue-raising programmes. However, Governments do not choose just any set of activities as their economic programme. Economic and social needs and ideas, as well as traditions, create political pressures on Governments to approach policy issues in particular ways.
Thus, for example, the economic and social role of the State is and has always been smaller in the United States of America than in countries of Western Europe or Japan. Nevertheless, pressures for fiscal reform in these countries, as in those of the rest of the world, have been taking them all towards smaller government.
The present chapter, while not attempting to be exhaustive, focuses on a selection of the fiscal issues that have been the object of reform efforts in recent years in a large number of developed, developing and transition economies. This chapter highlights how the issues have been addressed in individual countries. The cases scrutinized are not necessarily the pathbreaking ones in a given field, nor necessarily the most prominent in the literature of reform, but they are all cases in which the reform issues have been highly salient politically and where major policy changes have been attempted.
All Governments accept some social responsibilities, but the desirable or feasible extent of those responsibilities is put at issue whenever Governments face fiscal contraction pressures. Two main arguments justify government social expenditure. One is distributional: voters believe in the justice of providing a floor to the well-being of all citizens in their country or, more precisely, providing universal access to certain minimum standards of social services. In some countries, the minimum can be quite generous; but in others, it can be very small.
The second justification for public provision of social services is the market failure argument discussed in chapter V If left to the market, the extent of education and health services, for example, would be less than what is desirable from the point of view of society as a whole. In health, externalities and the public interest can be very direct, as in the spread of communicable disease. A case in point is the current epidemic of tuberculosis, which could have been prevented but was not (see chapter VIII). This is a case in which people, left to their own devices, have not pursued adequate treatment or screening for a fatal disease, one that they will spread before they succumb to it. Externalities in education involve matters that may constitute less of an immediate question of life and death, but are nevertheless essential: a proper functioning democracy requires an informed citizenry that thinks critically and this requires educated citizens. nrovi.si,[)n of social services A public role in education, health or other services does not, per se, indicate how the role should be financed or how the services should be provided.
While these services have positive externalities that give the government a motive for assisting in their provision, they are mostly also private goods in that they directly benefit the recipients. They differ from a "public good" (like clean air or security from foreign invasion) for which it is not possible to charge beneficiaries separately for more or less of it and where one person getting the benefit does not exclude another from "consuming" it equally. Education and health care are like standard private goods, where the cost could be borne directly by the beneficiary. Also, when beneficiaries pay at least part of the cost themselves, they tend to use the service in a less wasteful way than when it is provided gratis. For these reasons, it is frequently argued that more of the cost of services such as education and health should be covered by "user fees".
The imposition of user fees, however, raises difficult questions of social justice: that is, if the price is high the poor will not be able to afford enough of the services for the country to attain national social objectives. A compromise is graduated user fees, with the poor paying less than the rich. One difficult question is what the,lowest user fee should be. By the efficiency argument, all beneficiaries should pay something; however, for the very poor any payment may be excessive (indeed, even a zero fee may be too expensive for a person on the margin of subsistence, where the opportunity cost of, say, free education is forgoing earning the income that sustains life itself).
Once it is decided to differentiate charges on service recipients, a new group of questions emerges regarding how to make the differentiation, in other words, how to efficiently target subsidies so as to ensure that the full population is served without excessive subsidizing of the less needy.2 There is substantialliterature on targeting assistance on the poor, but no general theory.3
In addition to narrow questions of delivering services efficiently (and in a manner that does not demean the recipients), policy planners who take a longrun perspective often want to design programmes that are likely to continue to attract sufficient political support as long as it is needed. To the degree that all households have a stake in a social programme (for example, a national health service or social security pensions), the political support will be larger than if only the poor have a stake in the programme. This also makes for a stronger constituency which can complain effectively when the quality of services is inadequate.4
In practice, things can work the other way: under the overall politicalinfluence of the middle- and higher-income groups, provision of public social services is sometimes skewed to the perceived needs of those groups instead of to the needs of the nation as a whole or the needs of the poor in particular (examples include excessive spending on sophisticated hospitals instead of clinics and preventive health, highly subsidized higher education instead of technical schools and quality primary education).5 Indeed, if there is an advantage in a fiscal crisis, it is that the crisis may focus attention on the composition of government spending and make it easier to ask hard questions about what public priorities should be rather than what past government choices revealed them to have actually been. The outcome of such a re-examination, however, need not automatically benefit the poor. It depends on the political dynamics during the crisis.
The the poor in Ghana In Ghana, the level of government expenditure on education and health together was under 3 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP) in the early 1930s when a new government came to power after a decade of economic decline. From the beginning of the stabilization and structural adjustment programme that it introduced in 1933 (see chapter VII), the Government included the rehabilitation of dilapidated school and health facilities among its objectives.
Despite the demands of fiscal adjustment, Ghana was able to make increases, albeit small, in real current expenditures on social services, partly because of a considerable inflow of foreign assistance and the recovery of government revenues. Then in the second half of the 1930s, with output beginning to grow again, structural reforms in the health-care and education systems began, if with mixed results.
The gravity of the problem facing Ghana has to be appreciated.6 Half the physicians left the country between 1931 and 1934, and the number continued to decline: from 317 in 1934, the number of doctors fell to 623 in 1939. The number of nurses dropped from 17,743 in 1932 to 3,104 in 1937. In education, teachers had been unable to survive on official salaries under the old regime and many people who were teaching in 1932 were deemed not qualified. The educational system had been starved for textbooks, furniture and supplies and the quality of education was low. Thus, early in the adjustment programme,
Ghana sought to raise resources for these sectors.
The Ghanaian Government's concern about the effects of adjustment on vulnerable groups and their threat to the sustainability of adjustment led to the Programme of Actions to Mitigate the Social Costs of Adjustment (PAMSCAD) in 1933. This joint effort with the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) and the World Bank sought to address the basic needs of these groups in heath care, education and water supply. The programme suffered, however, from inadequate funding, and poor management and coordination, and it was always treated as an ad hoc set of projects rather than as an integral part of the adjustment programme. It was also never more than a tiny programme, even by the standards of a relatively small country.7
Nevertheless, combined with its other efforts, Ghana raised the share of social expenditures in GDP to 6 per cent by the early 1990s, a doubling since the decade began, but a figure below the level of the mid-1970s. A disproportionately small share of the spending, however, went to services for the lowerincome population. Ghana Living Standards Surveys showed that the poorest 20 per cent of the population received only 12 per cent of health spending in 1989 and only 11 per cent in 1992. In education, the poorest 20 per cent were the beneficiaries of 17 per cent of Government spending in 1989 and 16 per cent in 1992. Moreover, enrolment rates in primary education in 1992 were 26 per cent lower for the poorest fifth of the population than for the richest fifth.
Part of the problem was embedded in the funding of these expenditures.
Besides general budgetary support, fees were raised or imposed for some education and health services. These applied to all segments of the population, although the increases were higher for those items used more intensely by higher-income groups. That applied, at least, to the official prices. However,
Ghana's survey data found that in 1992 households were paying tuition for publicly provided education that was supposed to have been free. 8 There is also evidence that rural populations and the poor in particular were paying more for health services than people in urban areas, perhaps because of extralegal fees and unfamiliarity with the correct fees.
Part of the problem entails general questions of targeting assistance noted earlier. While cost recovery through user fees can playa role in financing part of the expenditure increases that are needed, it is not deemed appropriate by the Government of Ghana (and many others) for primary school tuition. 9 Moreover, cost recovery for education and medical care without quality improvements would be counter-productive: the poor will not struggle to pay fees for services in which they lack confidence. Without question, improvements have been made in Ghana since the early 1980s. There is, however, still so much distance to cross.
The m
.While China has enjoyed a long period of very high rates of economic growth, it has had to focus specific policy attention on mobilization of resources for social programmes. 10 Owing to economic reform and fiscal decentralization (see chapter VII), government financing of social services diminished significantly as a share of total output beginning in the early 1980s. As revenues of the central Government did not keep pace with the rise in GDP, there was a corresponding relative decrease in budgetary expenditure and thus in the capacity of the centre to redistribute resources. Central government expenditure on education fell from 3.1 per cent of GDP in 1985 to 2.4 per cent in 1994, while health expenditures stagnated (3.5 per cent of GDP in 1985 and 3.3 per cent in 1994).
Before the reforms, education was financed from central allocations and the distribution of educational resources was thus centrally determined. With relatively less central resources, the financing of education in China has come to rely increasingly on user fees and local government funds. This has increased the financial burden on poor households and therefore reduced their access to education. Moreover, with local government funds becoming more important, regional disparities in educational spending have grown - the regions with the lowest income also have the lowest per capita government expenditure on education and the highest private fees. This generates a vicious cycle: low income causes low education spending, which results in slow income growth and continued low income.
A similar pattern can be found in China's health expenditures. With economic reform, the structure of the health-care system shifted towards increased reliance on insurance schemes and user fees. Since the dissolution of rural communes in the early 1980s, rural collective funding of health care has been drastically reduced and health care in rural areas has increasingly relied on user fees. As a result, government-financed health care has become concentrated on the urban population, particularly government employees and a small minority of the rural population.
More generally, poverty alleviation remains a pressing concern in China.
Partly, this has been a consequence of decentralization, as noted above, and indeed the central government has since increased expenditure on poverty alleviation programmes targeted at poor regions and populations. In addition, however, the flow of migrants to the cities looking to share in China's economic dynamism has overwhelmed the capacity of the urban areas to absorb new workers. As a result, a group of poor, underemployed migrants has emerged, which has added a new dimension to the poverty problem.
All in all, a more equitable level of social welfare services requires increased activity by the central government in its redistributive function.
Increased central assistance will be needed, for example, if China is to achieve its goal of universal access to good-quality basic education by the next century.
In health care, extension of coverage of the insurance system beyond government and state enterprise employees or some other form of financing and provision of services will have to be devised. 11
Public services and market-oriented in New Zealand That social services are supplied in appropriate amounts to the appropriate people is very much a concern in developed as well as developing countries.
Resources may be less scarce, but the public nevertheless demands that the resources - their tax revenue - be well spent. In New Zealand, for example, after a substantial increase in government social expenditures in the early 1980s, the emphasis of public policy shifted to comprehensive deregulation and fiscal consolidation. 12 Concern was also raised about the effects of the tax system and social welfare programmes on work incentives. When a new Administration came into office in 1990, it strengthened market-oriented reforms that had begun in the 1980s and proceeded to base fiscal consolidation on the control of expenditure, primarily in the social welfare area.
In education, the Government ended free tertiary (university) education and instituted fees, but also offered means-tested financial assistance and more general access to education loans. Competition among universities in the provision of education was also heightened: public funding is allocated to universities based on the number of registered students and courses. In health care, the Government's role as a direct provider of services has been substantially reduced, while that in funding and administration of the nationwide healthcare system has been maintained. To date, however, no significant improve~ ment has been observed in the efficiency of the provision of these services. 13
New Zealand's reform of social expenditures has gone beyond introducing user fees. Expenditures on the unemployment insurance programme have been reduced by applying stricter eligibility criteria and lowering the incomereplacement ratio. Welfare payments to single parents and the sick and disabled have also been cut. At the same time, several unemployment assistance programmes directed at the long-term unemployed have been launched, providing retraining and employment services.
There is some indication that the distribution of household income became more unequal from 1988 to 1995, reflecting the wide-ranging reduction in social welfare benefits.14 There has also been a political reaction to the sharp reduction in social expenditures. While the 1996 election results showed continued public support for fiscal consolidation in general, there was also support for some increase, however modest, in social expenditure.
Cost containment and a smaller net in the United States In the United States, public expenditure for social welfare entitlements including the retirement income programme, health care for the aged and vari0us means-tested programmes - increased from 5.4 per cent of GDP in 1968 to 11.2 per cent in 1995. Two factors in particular have been behind this trend: rising life expectancy, which raised outlays for the aged; and the rising incidence of single parenthood, which greatly increased the numbers eligible for anti-poverty assistance. In addition, soaring medical costs have led to the sharp increase in public health care expenditures for the poor and the elderly.
At the same time, the very strong public support in the last two decades for public income for retirees and the disabled - in which the bulk of the population has a direct stake in one form or another - has made it politically difficult to curtail the growth of such expenditures, let alone scale them back.
Nevertheless, with agreement of the two major political parties to balance the federal budget by the year 2002, coupled with pledges to ,cut taxes, the political focus has turned to social entitlement programmes as the area that can yield the largest amount of expenditure reduction. Unprecedented reductions in the growth of outlays for health-care programmes have been proposed, while the overhaul of social assistance programmes for the poor has begun.
Besides reducing government expenditures and government's role as provider of these services, these new policies reflect a smaller area of political consensus on the redistributive role of government than in earlier decades.
The Welfare Reform Bill enacted in August 1996 ended a six decade-old federal guarantee of aid to the poor. In the past, unlimited federal grants to state and local governments matched those governments' outlays on public assistance programmes. This is being replaced with block (lump-sum) grants, which give the States considerable leeway with respect to programme assistance.
Since the aim is to reduce overall funding, States will have to make hard choices in allocating their limited grants. States already differ in their capacity and desire to increase spending on welfare and the differences may become accentuated. Moreover, if more people than expected need support after the grants have been allocated, the fact that States and localities will have to bear the full incremental cost may just mean non-provision of full services to all who need them. In addition, maximum time limits have been set for receiving federal income support benefits, with a view to eliminating a so-called culture of dependency. There are some measures for job training, but it is uncertain whether there will be enough jobs for which former welfare recipients are competitive candidates. In addition, one year after loss-of∑income support, eligibility for federally funded health care for the poor is lost, leaving state or local government or private charities to pick up the slack. In short, the new system shrinks the social safety net for the poor.15
Social services in transition: the Russian Federation and Hiunp;(o,ry In the countries undergoing economic transition, entirely new systems of financing and provision of social welfare have been needed. Under central planning, many social programmes had been organized at the level of state enterprises, although funding was allocated from the central government budget.
New service delivery and new funding systems were thus required.
In the Russian Federation, central funding shrank during the general disarray accompanying the early years of transition. Moreover, while new modes of service delivery had to be developed, additional demands for social benefits arose because of the dislocations of transition itself, as reflected in worsening health statistics. Data indicate, however, that employment in health and education has been stable; taken together with many instances of considerable overstaffing, this suggests that significant restructuring in the provision of services has not yet occurred.16
The social consensus in the Russian Federation still maintains that government should be the provider of social welfare. To date, the federal Government remains the principal provider, but its ability to play this role is restricted by the severe limits on fiscal resources. Social welfare spending remains the largest item in the central budget, constituting 26 per cent of total expenditure or over 7.5 per cent of GDP in 1995. In addition, the Parliament continues to proliferate unfunded entitlement commitments that add to the burden of the central Government. Meanwhile, the planned devolution of responsibility for social spending to local governments has not yet taken place, as many local governments lack access to adequate revenues to underwrite such expenditures.
Moreover, the effectiveness of social welfare spending in directing government resources to the needy remains very low, as government social programmes are in general not explicitly targeted; instead, there is a high reliance on an overall subsidy of the cost of providing services. A shift to user fees and employer contributions to complement government financing has been initiated but is progressing slowly. Introducing and establishing the mechanisms, procedures and institutions for this new approach take time even in the best of circumstances.
In Hungary, restructuring of the social welfare system began with the start of transition and aimed to give the State a less dominant role in financing and administration. Instead of applying annual resources from the central budget, as under central planning, the Government established two insurance funds, one for health care and the other for pensions, as discussed below. The funds were organized as separate and independent entities, with their own boards consisting of representatives of beneficiaries and employers. Other non-insurance benefits, such as child benefits, supplementary pensions and other transfer payments, were retained as the responsibility of the central budget.
However, despite the intent to reduce the role of the State in social welfare, the level of current expenditure has risen. The newly established health insurance fund has been in growing deficit since 1991, owing to rising outlays for health-care costs and arrears in enterprise contributions. In the end, the Government has had to make up the deficit. More generally, Hungarian government expenditure for social welfare purposes rose from 13 to 19 per cent of GDP between 1990 and 1994. However, expenditures have shifted significantly towards means-tested payments and subsidies to households for the maintenance of their standard of living, since generalized consumer price subsidies have been cut back severely.
The case Ol(!-3i,ge penS]IOn reform Social pensions for the elderly are major government income-transfer programmes in developed, transition and some developing countries. 11 The government need not be the exclusive provider of these schemes, as many individuals would in any case seek to buy "contracts" to smooth their income over the life cycle. Indeed, such schemes are available from insurance companies in many countries in the form of annuities. In these plans, a person pays premiums over a period of years in exchange for regular payments beginning at some future time of retirement, and continuing until his or her death. Similar income-smoothing pensions, paid for out of the wage bill, are often provided on a group basis by employers for employees.
Governments become involved in provision of old-age pensions because the market supply alone would be inadequate on two fundamental counts: coverage of the population would be too small and cost would be too high. The reasons for the market failures involve both the "adverse selection" problem in insurance markets noted in chapter V (would men "subsidize" the annuities of longer-lived women?) and the unit cost savings (economies of scale) that are available when a mandatory programme covers an entire nation. In addition, private insurance companies generally cannot offer policies that guarantee that the value of the pension will not be eroded by unforeseen inflation.
Governments also introduce such programmes because of the opportunity they afford to redistribute incomes, the elderly being in many countries among the lower-income strata of the population, especially in the absence of their old-age pension. Many old-age pension schemes are financed by Governments, in effect, as transfers from the working population to the retired population, in contrast to the life-cycle income-smoothing schemes that arise in the private sector. They are thus an instance of the income redistribution function of government.
However, government operation of pension schemes for the elderly has a further justification, namely, as ,a "merit good". This essentially reflects the argument that individuals left to themselves would not act in their own best interest and that government therefore needs to intercede to ensure that they provide for their old age. 18
Considerable interest has recently arisen in changing the old-age pension schemes so that they are no longer mainly inter-generational transfers, but instead become mainly mandatory savings schemes. This is already largely the case in a few countries, but more are considering the change. If they were to make the change, the distributional element would be removed from their programmes and their continuance as government activities would have to be defended on the other bases.
In other words, some countries have converted their social pension schemes for the elderly from largely "defined benefit" schemes to mainly "defined contribution" arrangements. In the former case, the government stipulates the rules that determine how much retirees are to receive and taxes are set on the working population and on enterprises (in some countries) so as to produce the requisite resources.19 In the latter, employees and employers (in some cases) contribute a pre-set but mandatory share of income to a savings scheme and employees reap however much their savings will have earned by retirement.2o The question then is, if social security for the aged becomes only a savings plan, how strong is the case for government to remain involved at all? One answer could be that the government needed to playa direct role because the financial system in the country was not adequately developed (a market failure argument), and thus appropriate savings vehicles were not available. Under this argument, the government might withdraw from the activity once the financial system developed adequately. The government would still supervise the private pension schemes to ensure that they were soundly run, to enforce payments to the funds and to ensure that higher-risk individuals were not discriminated against; but it would not have to operate the scheme directly. Even here, the government enforcement of employee contributions (forced saving) would be justified only on merit-good grounds (as overcoming myopia). In any event, these questions will begin to arise as some of the reform plans are designed.
United States The Social Security System in the United States is faced with a surge in future pension obligations because of the ageing of the population. The system is a defined-benefit programme financed by payroll taxes imposed on employers and employees. Benefits are based on earnings levels and the number of years of contributions and are indexed to inflation. It is funded mainly on a "pay-as-you-go" basis, taxing current workers and employers to pay current pensioners. However, given the rising share of retired people, Social Security taxes also embody a savings component: it operates a surplus at this time so that it will accumulate resources for the future when the number of workers per retiree will be smaller. Based on demographic projections, Social Security is currently underfunded in relation to its future obligations.
More precisely, under current law and the projections of the Trustees of the Social Security System, revenues from contributions and income taxes on pension benefits will exceed programme outlays only until the year 2011. After 2018, outlays will exceed tax revenue and the interest income on holdings in all Social Security trust funds. The trust funds themselves will be exhausted in 2029. After that, either payments will have to be reduced or other revenues supplied, eventually covering about 30 per cent of programme benefits. Therefore, there is widespread agreement that the existing system needs to be reformed. How this is to be accomplished remains the subject of a major political debate. According to the Council of Economic Advisors to the President: "A variety of approaches should be considered, but any possible changes must also ensure that the benefits of reduced poverty and increased economic security for the aged and disabled are not put at risk." 21
Three major approaches, each with different means of financing, methods of investment offunds and levels of benefits, have been identified by the Presidential Advisory Council on Social Security.22 Importantly, one of the options, the "Maintenance of Benefits" proposal, would make several relatively minor modifications in taxation, indexation of benefits for inflation, extension of workforce coverage and management of the trust-fund portfolios, and thereby make up the funding shortfall. In that regard, the United States system is not gravely overextended and can be fully secured. Other options entail adding variations of the savings schemes (defined-contribution pensions), as noted above. The choice between the different systems will involve trade-offs between individual and government responsibility, transfer of income between generations and risk and reward of alternative investment instruments for Social Security funds. Also, the popularity of and reliance upon the current system can be expected to constrain the changes that will be politically acceptable.
In Japan, as the culmination of many years of structural change in the economy, the public pension scheme's funding has been brought into the forefront of public debate. First, the old-age dependency ratio - the ratio of those aged 65 years or over to those between ages 15 and 65 - increased from 10.2 per cent in 1970 to 13.5 per cent in 1980 and 17.3 per cent in 1990. Social security expenditure - including public aid, social welfare, social insurance, public health and medical care, and medical services for the elderly - rose from 4.6 per cent of CDP in 1970 to 11.4 per cent in 1990 (see figure Vl.l). Of this latter figure, about 40 per cent was for pensions.
Second, the long-run growth rate of Japanese real CDPhas apparently slowed again: the 10 per cent annual average growth rates in the 1960s were replaced by 4 per cent a year averages in the 1970s and 1980s and even those growth rates now appear high by the standards of the 1990s (see table A.2).
Slower growth of CDP meant slower growth of tax revenues, while under the heavy pressure to sustain spending on various programmes, the ratio of gross public debt to CDP rose from 11.1 per cent in 1970 to 51.2 per cent in 1980 and kept rising in the 1980s (see figure VLl).
It was, in other words, apparent more than 15 years ago that the rate of increase in public debt was not sustainable, especially as the population was forecast to continue to age rapidly, reducing its contributions to tax revenues while increasing its drawing from social insurance programmes. Fiscal adjustments were thus made in the 1980s, which began to take effect in the later years of the decade, along with the revenue boost from temporarily more rapid CDP growth and from asset inflation in the buoyant financial markets. The debt-to-CDP ratio peaked at 72.5 per cent in 1988 and began to decline, although anti-recessionary programmes in the 1990s have sent the ratio to almost 90 per cent of CDP in 1996 and higher levels are expected in future years.
The concerns that shape the outlook and policy agenda today are thus the same as in the early 1980s. The debt-to-CDP ratio is growing unsustainably, while the dependency ratio is expected to climb to 25 per cent in the year 2000 and reach 50 per cent in 2050. Coupled with the continued slow growth of the Japanese economy over the long term, this ageing of the population could put considerable pressure on the fiscal balance and public debt.
With this in view, the Covernment in 1994 reformed the two major public pension schemes that together cover over 85 per cent of the social security system, namely, the National Pension Scheme (which provides a basic pension to all citizens) and the Employees' Pension Scheme (which provides earnings and contribution-related pensions to private-sector employees). The reform consisted of three major changes that are common to many pension plan reforms: contribution rates were increased, the eligibility age was raised (from 60 to 65) and the growth rate of benefits was cut (by indexing them to the more slowly growing after-tax income instead of to gross income). These changes were forecast to ensure the long-term sustainability of the scheme, on the condition that the Government raised its contributions to social security financing from 1.25 per cent of GDP in 1995 to about 2 per cent in 2020.
However, this will not itself solve the problem. Under current fiscal spending projections, including for the social security system, the tax burden would have to rise above 50 per cent of GDP in 2025.23 This would require sets of taxes that appear likely to have significant disincentive effects, with economic growth suffering as a result. In order to keep the tax burden on the national economy below 50 percent and maintain fiscal balance over the long term, the Government will have to consider not only further adjustments in the pension schemes, but, more generally, also the composition of fiscal expenditures and revenues.
Some Japanese authors are beginning to ask a more challenging question:
Will Japan continue to need for many decades into the future the pay-as-yougo social security system of which it has been proud? The system has made inter-generational transfers so as to improve the distribution of wealth among generations. In the decades when the younger generation enjoyed considerable benefits from the economic prosperity built on the accumulation of past economic activities, the older generation was not affluent enough to accumulate sufficient wealth to adequately support its life after retirement. As a result, a wide gap in lifetime earnings between the two groups was observed. At present, however, medium-term economic growth in Japan is much lower than in the past, the gap in lifetime earnings among generations is not expected to be large and the per capita income of the current young generation is reasonably high. Some view this as sufficient economic and social reason to shift to a fully funded pension system managed by private agents. The role of the Government under such an economic and social environment could be restricted to guaranteeing a minimum standard of living and to regulating and supervising private pension funds. Indeed, certain other countries have already begun to move in this direction.
Argentina faced a crisis in its public pension system in the 1980s, when the real value of pensions fell by over 50 per cent. The Government that came into office in 1989 began a broad series of reforms in monetary and fiscal affairs (see chapter VII). One part of the reforms, introduced in 1993, was a major make-over of the public pension system.
The difficulties of the system in the 1980s stemmed in part from repeated bouts of high inflation, declining real wages and falling employment, which undermined the value of contributions. At the same, rising life expectancy and low retirement ages added to the pay-outs from the system, leaving it with growing financial imbalances. Widespread evasion of contributions was also a major impediment to keeping the system viable.
The reform entailed replacing the old system with a new pay-as-you-go structure that contained different benefit, contribution and pay-out criteria, combined with a new scheme based on individual "capitalization" accounts.
The sums accumulated in the latter are invested in either a government fund or one of a number of approved private funds. All of the latter are highly regulated and include limits on the composition of the portfolios of securities in which they invest the workers' savings. The object is to reduce risk through adequate diversification and avoidance of excessively risky investments (although some equity investment is permitted).
The system as a whole is financed by taxes on employers and workers.
Employers and self-employed workers contribute 16 per cent of gross salaries and incomes, respectively, to the pay-as-you-go system. In addition, all workers contribute 11 per cent of their earnings. If they wish to remain in the old system, the full amount goes into the pay-as-you-go system, adding to their "defined-benefit" pensions; alternatively, they may place their funds in the public or one of the private pension schemes and have the earnings on those funds determine the corresponding part of their pension.
The Government established a new public institution to be responsible for collecting all social security taxes, with the aim of decreasing the cost of collection through economies of scale. In addition, it increased the minimum period of contribution from 15 to 30 years and raised the earliest retirement age to 65, which slows the increase in the number of pensioners. Moreover, the traditional component provides a smaller universal pension than in the past, covering about 28 per cent of average salary after at least 30 years of contribution.
Certain transitional measures were also required. First, before launching the new system the Government floated a special bond issue to clear about $10 billion in arrears of the previous fund. In addition, it earmarked general tax revenues to cover net outlays in the early years of the new pay-as-you-go programme, when retirement obligations would exceed the new levels of tax receipts. The supplementary tax revenues were necessary because public pension payments had grown to more than 40 per cent of current government expenditure, double the level of the early 1980s. Employers' and employees' contributions covered only two thirds of these payments; the rest was covered by general tax revenues.
The new system has started rather successfully. About 65 per cent of covered workers have chosen to participate in the mixed system, meaning that more than just new entrants into the labour force are choosing this option: a large proportion of existing workers are switching to the new scheme as well.
Financially, and contributing to the support for the scheme, the first year's results were extraordinary: the real yield on the new pension funds was 17.8 per cent in 1995.24 The amount accumulated in these funds at the end of that year totalled $2.5 billion, equivalent to 0.9 per cent of GDP.25
Hungary, like the other economies in transition, is developing a public pension system for a decentralized and market-oriented economy. It has had a single pay-as-you-go system since 1949, when the Government took over three limited and insolvent pre-war funds. During the period of central planning, the pension fund wa~ extended to the full workforce and benefits were increased, although the Government had difficulty maintaining the real value of its pension commitments, especially once inflation rates began to rise in the late 1980s.
The recent period of pension reform began in 1991 with the introduction of regular indexation instead of periodic legislation to raise nominal pension benefits and taxes, and new methods were introduced for calculating benefits. The net effect was to reduce the average "replacement rate" of pension benefits to 53 per cent of previous earnings in 1993 from 64 per cent in 1990 (itself down from earlier years).
The new public pension fund was removed from the central government budget in 1993 and is now organized as an independent insurance fund under the control of the Board for Pension Insurance and its agencies. The Board comprises representatives of beneficiaries and employers who contribute to the fund. Payments to the fund are mandatory for employers, workers and the self-employed.
The fund has nevertheless been struggling with substantial deficits owing to both lower-than-expected contributions and an unexpectedly large increase in claimants. Employers have been evading payments by shifting to remuneration that is not subject to contributions and an increasing number of workers have salaries that exceed the individual earnings ceiling for obligatory contributions.
Bankruptcy and liquidity problems also reduce employer contributions.
At the same time, rising unemployment has caused a surge in early retirement and claims for disability retirement, putting pressure on pay-outs.
As a consequence, the fund became illiquid and despite its having been established only in 1993, the Government has already had to assume debt incurred by the fund to finance deficits of previous years. More recently, the Government has had to extend loans to the fund to maintain its liquidity. Thus, before the new system can be viable and operate independently of the government budget, additional adjustments appear to be required, for example, in enforcing contributions and setting their levels, as well as in determining conditions of eligibility for benefits.
One observer placed the pension problem squarely in its political context: "In sum, we now have a pension system in Hungary that does not satisfy anyone. Low-income pensioners are deprived because they are practically starving. Pensioners in the higher pension brackets...are deprived because they justly feel they have been robbed ofthe fruits of a long life dedicated to work. Business and international financial institutions are outraged because they consider the system too expensive. It is thus generally agreed that a complete overhaul of the pension system, a radical reform to be codified bya comprehensive new pension act, is unavoidable. How, when and in what form this can be achieved is of course much debated.''26
Indeed, a new social security law which would incorporate a mixed definedbenefit and defined-contribution system, was expected to go before the Hungarian Parliament in May 1997. u D
In most political discussions of social spending reductions, the cutbacks are presented as unfortunate necessities. Very few indeed are the officials standing for election who would proudly state that they tore a hole in the social safety net. Rather, they plead that financial stringency forces them to take economy measures and prompts the search for more efficient ways to meet their social obligations (in the end, they may well be proud of the efficiency gains). The tone and content of discussion about some other reductions in government spending are completely different. A prime example of this occurs when an easing of international or civil tensions allows the country to reduce military spending. A second case concerns reducing the direct economic role of the State, for example, through privatization of state enterprises. In these latter cases, officials hold out the prospect of greater economic activity with more benefits to the rest of the economy (more foreign exchange from privatized mining, better service from privatized utilities and so on). It is, in effect, an admission either that state involvement was originally a mistake or that the reasons that once justified state involvement no longer apply.
H~~dllc:in~ the scope of As discussed in chapter V, dissatisfaction with state enterprises in directly productive activities grew to permeate the mainstream view in developed, transition and developing countries. Observers highlighted state-enterprise inefficiencies, which were attributed to lack of competition, absence of incentives to perform better and "soft budget" constraints (in which the government budget could be relied upon to cover losses with subsidies). In some developing countries with relatively stagnant economies, part of the blame for their difficulties was put on the poor performance of the state enterprises that dominated in manufacturing and infrastructure.
If state enterprises were thus increasingly seen as "part of the problem", privatizing them was only part of the solution. One of the problems in developed, developing and transition economies was that, besides being asked to supply a good or service efficiently, state enterprises were performing a variety of other functions, such as employment creation or protection, social service provision and other redistributive tasks. Thus, privatization meant that other means would be needed to meet the social goals.
In addition, the role of government in the entire process of privatization has to be substantial. The privatizing government will usually want to obtain the best price possible for the assets being privatized, although sometimes capitalizing on the political opportunity for quick action may take precedence over having protracted negotiations over the best price. In any case, evaluating the worth of the assets is a complex task and one that is not independent of complementary policies of government. Certainly, one lesson derived from the experience of the Treuhandanstalt (Treuhand) in selling the state enterprises of the former German Democratic Republic after its reintegration into the Federal Republic of Germany is that the exercise can be quite costlyP
Privatizing Governments have also had to develop the capacity for indirect oversight, administration and regulatory enforcement. Typically, the idea in privatizing, say, the local telephone company was not to exchange an inefficient state enterprise for an unregulated monopoly. However, regulation can entail a highly technical set of legal practices in which contending interests (purchasers and the supplier) vie for influence over the regulatory authority. As in other areas of government, this requires a well-trained and adequately remunerated civil service and an effective public oversight of government itself.
Cases While it has affected all groups of countries, the privatization movement has been greatest, naturally, in the transition economies, where it has been a major component of the process of transformation from an administrative to a marketbased system and a means of generating revenue while reducing government expenditure on subsidies to loss-making enterprises. The early lessons ofthis movement have broad applicability.28 In particular, the establishment of an appropriate legal framework for privatization and enforcement has been a central requirement for success. It is also found to be important that privatization policies lead to appropriate corporate governance structures that are conducive to appropriate market-oriented enterprise behaviour. Measures to promote and safeguard competitive conditions were found to be essential where markets were distorted, particularly in cases where, for example, large privatized enterprises could monopolize the market.
In the case of the Russian Federation, the proceeds from privatization of state enterprises were consistently less than the amounts expected, based on budget forecasts. It had been recognized that receipts would be below potential because of transaction costs and the difficulties in valuing assets when markets were not fully functioning. Moreover, because of the desire to sell to domestic investors, prices were set relatively low and account had to be taken of the liquidity constraints of potential buyers. The limitations on the share of an enterprise that foreign investors could own further restricted the number of potential buyers. Because of the dearth of buyers and to protect employment, particularly in unprofitable enterprises, restructuring of enterprises before privatization became necessary. This has entailed the use of government funds and sometimes also involved the payment of arrears in inter-enterprises debt.29
Argentina provides an example of a very different privatization exercise.
Political momentum for privatization of public enterprises grew with the enact ment of the Law of Reform of the State in 1989 (see chapter VII). As part of the broader programme to redefine and reduce the role of the State in the economy, which included the pension reform noted above, a vast privatization programme was undertaken that aimed to cut the fiscal deficit, increase industrial competitiveness and stimulate foreign investment inflows. It was implemented in the context of an overall deregulation of domestic markets and liberalization of trade.
With strong political consensus behind it, the Argentine Government was able to implement its programme with remarkable speed. The result was that almost all the state enterprises were privatized in less than four years, covering the telecommunication, transport, defence, power, oil and reinsurance industries.
Revenues from the programme amounted to approximately $26 billion between 1990 and 1993, paid with a combination of cash, investor redemption of Argentine public debt and transfer of liabilities.30 There were, however, significant negative aspects of the programme, most notably the loss of over 100,000 jobs. Also, according to some critics, the speed of the privatization process resulted in underpricing of assets and a lack of transparency of divestiture procedures, at least as far as the earliest privatization cases were concerned.31
A privatization process began in Ghana in the late 1980s, after adjustment policies had been in place for several years (see chapter VII). The Government encountered unexpected problems, however, such as large inter-enterprise debt and inadequate financing of large severance payments. Given the condition of many of the enterprises, the Government also had to set aside a sizeable fund for recapitalizing them before they could be offered for sale and to provide training and compensation to redundant workers.
In the initial years of Ghana's programme, mostly smaller units were privatized and the net impact on government revenues was insignificant or negative owing to the costs of preparing the firms for sale. The programme gathered momentum by the early 1990s, however, when eight of the most profitable enterprises were sold, including the Ashanti Goldfields, which helped bolster government revenues. Currently over 100 enterprises are slated for privatization, although adverse employment effects continue to be a serious concern.
Among developed economies, the experience of New Zealand illustrates the direct and strong impact of privatization on reducing government expenditures and public debt. Privatization of restructured state enterprises began in 1987 as part of a larger programme of comprehensive structural reforms initiated in 1984 and aimed at increasing efficiency through reduced government regulation and intervention. Asset sales between 1988 and 1994 were equivalent to approximately one quarter of total government debt. The resultant decline of subsidies to enterprises reduced government expenditures significantly. However, the divestiture reduced employment by 40,000 workers, a number constituting 2.5 per cent of the labour force. 1(Jlst4f!ring new investment: inj'ra:stl"U(~tll,re Privatization, per se, is a transfer of assets and the chief expectation behind the measure is that the new owner will operate the enterprise more efficiently.
It also relieves the government of the obligation to expand investment in the enterprise. In some government activities, there is no substitute for government investment. However, in other activities, as government withdraws, it nevertheless retains a strong need to ensure that private investment comes forward.32
The Philippines in the 1980s provides a case in point. Public infrastructure investment and maintenance expenditures had been severely reduced from the mid-1980s until the beginning of the 1990s in order to accommodate heavy and rising interest payments on domestic and foreign debt, while a reduction of the budget deficit was sought. Public investment expenditures by the national Government fell from about 3 per cent of GDP in 1980-1982 to about half that in the mid-1980s and never recovered to earlier levels.
By 1991, the power sector, in particular, was in crisis as inadequate supply and distribution resulted in frequent power outages which seriously disrupted manufacturing and export production and undermined economic recovery.
There were also serious concerns about the management of the power sector.
Between generation and consumption, over 15 per cent of the electricity was lost, compared with losses of between 5 and 10 per cent in better-managed systems.
By the same token, the Philippine power sector sold less than 500 megawatt hours of electricity per employee per year, compared with over 1,500 hours in Argentina and almost 5,000 hours in Chile.33
The Government's strategy for improving the power sector was to create the space for a greater role for private participation. This fit with the main thrust of the structural reform programme initiated in 1986, which had been to reduce the involvement of government in economic production and rely more on private initiative and markets. In 1991, it thus enacted the "BOT Law"34 to facilitate domestic and foreign private investment in infrastructure, mainly through the "Build, operate and transfer" model. The idea was that a domestic or foreign private firm would enter into a joint venture with the government or a domestic firm to build and operate a power facility under a government franchise for a set period of time which could last up to 25 years, after which ownership would be transferred to the local counterpart. The power plant was to be operated as a regulated monopoly, allowing the firm to earn a competitive rate of profit. In addition, under the BOT Law, projects were placed on the "fast track" for approval and implementation.
The measure was highly successful in ending the power crisis by the end of 1993 as substantial private generation capacity became operational in a short period of time. Nevertheless, revisions of the original measure have been necessary to correct such problems as high costs and inefficient operation owing to lack of competition and the need to develop an adequate regulatory framework.
In 1994, an amendment was enacted to expand the Government's regulatory powers where large externalities or the potential of a natural monopoly existed, while increasing the modes of investment and extending private investment to a wide variety of infrastructure activities. This has been effective in attracting private investment in roads, railroad and water services.
A spl~ci;!lJ opp,ortuniity: reI1U{~ed defence spÄ:nding One category of government expenditure that has undergone major changes in the past decade is military expenditure, reflecting a different perception of what security risks are being faced. At the global level, military expenditure fell from 5.7 per cent of the value of output in 1983 to 3.0 per cent in 1994.35
There were sharp declines both in the countries of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and in the members of the former Warsaw Treaty Organization, but there were also significant declines in the developing world.36
Most attention has focused on defence cuts in the major countries, especially those that faced each other across the cold-war divide, but there have also been important developments in some of the smaller economies. In some, there had been an internal military struggle and the end of conflict brought a welcome demobilization. In these countries, as in the larger ones, demobilization has entailed costs of retraining, relocation and severance payments, and pressure on unemployment. At the same time, the decline in defence outlays has freed resources for other public uses, including essential infrastructure rehabilitation and social expenditures. Most importantly, the demobilization process was an important signal of the relaxation of tensions and thus provided a boost in confidence in the possibilities of development.
The case Nicaragua's civil war continued after the Sandinistas came to power in 1978, and the economy was depressed after the war ended, when power was transferred to the Union Nacional Opositora after the election of February 1990. GDP was almost 40 per cent below its 1977 peak; an unmanageable fiscal deficit had been financed with credit creation, resulting in monthly inflation rates as high as 50-100 per cent. External debt had risen from $1. 7 billion in 1978 to $10.6 billion in 1990, more than 6 times GDP and 27 times total exports, making Nicaragua one of the most indebted nations in the world.
The Government had stopped servicing commercial bank debt in 1986 and multilateral debt in 1988. The opportunity to build a peace economy in the 1990s was thus very important.
Nicaragua indeed saw a sharp reduction in military expenditure - the share of expenditure on the military and police fell from 14.2 per cent of GDP in 1990 to 4.4 per cent in 1994 (see table VI.l). At the same time, the Government was able to raise tax collection by 7 percentage points of GDP and substantial international assistance was supplied in support of the new Administration.
Coupled with monetary stabilization and exchange-rate adjustment, a credible adjustment programme was put into effect. With assistance from donor Governments, arrears with multinational organizations were cleared by 1991 and an IMF standby arrangement was agreed. Three bilateral creditors - the United States, Mexico and Venezuela - forgave a significant amount of debt, and at the end of the year Nicaragua signed its first rescheduling agreement with the Paris Club on terms that included writing off 50 per cent of a portion of its outstanding debt-servicing and concessional rates of interest on the remainder.
Together, these factors set Nicaragua on a recovery path, first with inflation curtailed sharply and then in 1994 with the beginning of economic recovery.
The military cutbacks were an important contributor to this process. Demobilization of the armed forces, which had begun in 1989, allowed the Government to reduce overall spending without touching politically sensitive areas of the budget. In other words, the military and police have borne most of the cuts in government spending in Nicaragua. Spending on social services continued to absorb approximately 15 per cent of GDP, while fixed capital formation by the public sector has increased steadily from 2 per cent of GDP in 1990 to 14 per cent in 1996.37 By the same token, government employment has fallen from 287,000 in 1990 to 94,000 in 1996, with the largest single component of the reduction having been in the military and police (from 109,000 to 24,000). On the other hand, there has been relatively little reabsorption of these people into the economy and unemployment remains high.
The case ofEthiopia In May 1991, Ethiopia's military regime was toppled by the Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Democratic Front, a coalition of groups, some of which had been engaged in armed conflict against the Government for as long as three decades. The previous Government had itself come to power in 1974, when it toppled the Government of the Emperor. The ensuing decades were a disaster for the economy: civil war and political instability, a major conflict with neighbouring Somalia in 1977-1978, recurrent bouts of drought and famine and dislocations from government programmes of resettlement and villagization in a failed effort to generate a resurgence of economic growth through central planning.
Ethiopia began and ended the period as one of the poorest countries in Africa.
During the years of the former Government, the budget was dominated by military expenditures, which regularly absorbed 40-50 per cent of current government spending during the 1970s - over 60 per cent during the Ogaden war with Somalia in 1977-1978 - and over 30 per cent on average in the 1980s.
Defence expenditures averaged almost 9 per cent of GDP in the 1980s; health plus education less than 4 per cent.
By 1991, the cumulative effect of war, sabotage and neglect was evident in the deterioration of the country's infrastructure. An estimated 1,160 schools were partially or completely destroyed, while 90 per cent of the road network and most regional airports suffered considerable war-related damage. Fewer than 25 per cent of the population had access to modern health-care facilities and less than one third of children received immunization.38
The new Government in 1991 thus afforded Ethiopia an important opportunity to begin to rebuild the country. In July 1991, a national conference of major political organizations agreed to a National Charter, which installed the Transitional Government of Ethiopia and in 1994 a new constitution established the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia. The unique feature of the new Government is its federal structure which guarantees each State the right to secede from the federation and which aims to devolve considerable authority to the States in economic and social affairs, a dramatic departure from hundreds of years of central control.
As in Nicaragua, the Ethiopian Government raised public investment, while cutting back military spending sharply (see table VI. 1). In addition, tax collection improved and there were considerable foreign assistance inflows. Defence expenditures, which averaged over 30 per cent of total government spending in the late 1930s, were cut sharply in the 1992 budget to about 15 per cent of expenditures and further to under 10 per cent in 1994. This enabled capital outlays, which were concentrated in the rehabilitation of infrastructure, to rise from 25 per cent of total expenditure in 1991 to 40 per cent in 1994. Capital outlays in the regions were directed at the educational and agricultural projects in the rural areas and water and sewerage projects in the regional capitals.
Current health and social expenditures were maintained at about 14 per cent of total expenditures.
The rebuilding task in Ethiopia remains enormous. Indeed, the aim is to build a political and economic structure that is dramatically different from anything before in the country and to set the economy on a new development path. It will take considerable time to develop new working relationships between the centre and the regions, and between the public and the private sectors, and to build new skills, especially among the hundreds of thousands of demobilized soldiers and retrenched civil service workers. That GDP has begun to grow again is most encouraging; but gains from growth still need to be experienced for some time and need to be spread widely around the country.
L
Government budgeting is typically a matter of fitting competing demands into a spending package that is deemed "affordable". In recent years, as noted above, the pressures on government have been to restrict expenditures. In chapter V, the limit to government expenditure was called the budgetary "envelope". The envelope was determined by the maximum sustainable borrowing and the revenue-raising capacity of the tax system. However, if the tax system was reformed to yield more revenue, it would relax the envelope restrictions on expenditure. Clearly, Governments seek to accomplish exactly this. It was also concluded in chapter V that the limit to sustainable borrowing was hard to discover in practice and that,∑ instead, Governments adopted rules of thumb for sound fiscal management. They have also sought rules and procedures to ensure that the combination of expenditures and revenues remains within those limits - that they can, in other words, manage the fiscal envelope.
H.~lising tax revenues There are three basic ways to pay for government expenditure: taxes, seigniorage and borrowing!∑ As discussed in chapter V, on a long-term basis seigniorage can provide revenues equivalent only to a few percentage points of GDP and there are limits to borrowing. The overwhelming bulk of resources for government expenditure thus has to come from tax revenues.4Il In the developed economies as a whole, general government outlays are on the order of 40 per cent of GDP, while central government expenditures in the developing countries are over 20 per cent of GDP on average. Government spending ratios in transition economies are changing dramatically as part of the transition, but most of the economies are likely to end up with ratios closer to those of the developed countries.
In short, Governments need to raise somewhere between one fifth and two fifths of GDP from tax revenue on a continuing basis. They already do this and tax ratios even above two fifths of GDP can be sustained with a judicious combination of different types of taxes. As one observer concluded: "It has become fashionable to be pessimistic about the ability to raise large fractions of GDP from taxes. The problems of disincentives to effort and high incentives for tax evasion and corruption of tax administrations are invoked.
These are serious issues. But the pessimism can be overdone..."42
Policy makers want their tax systems not only to generate substantial revenue streams, but to do so transparently, equitably, at low administrative cost, with minimum distortion of economic signals in the economy, and in a manner that is not perceived as excessively burdensome. Although they are perhaps far from this ideal, many governments are striving to lessen the gap between it and their own tax systems. The broad features of some of their reform programmes may be outlined here.
With weak administrative structures that make the enforcement of tax codes difficult, lower-income countries have traditionally relied heavily on taxes on foreign trade. With a limited number of entry points into a country and with official oversight of ports and international transportation, tariffs and other trade taxes are relatively easy to administer. Indeed, 28 per cent of tax revenue on average still comes from trade taxes in Africa in the 1990s, compared with 1 per cent in developed economies.
Heavy reliance on trade taxes, however, has many disadvantages. In the first place, the whole direction of international trade policy has been towards liberalizing access to markets, inter alia, by reducing rates of tax on foreign trade.
In the second place, reliance on export taxes and tariffs makes an important source of revenue dependent on the exchange rate: a devaluation of the currency, by increasing the value of trade in domestic currency, would normally increase tax revenues. Likewise, countries that experience large capital inflows and pressures for currency appreciation suffer the opposite revenue result. Moreover, the tax intake on foreign trade is unstable, not just because of fluctuating exchange rates, but also because of fluctuations in prices of export commodities on world markets.
One simple way to broaden the tax base has been to expand the number of items that are taxed, although this may also require additional tax collection machinery, influencing which items are taxed. For example, taxes on petroleum products are easy to administer if there is a single state oil company. Thus in Ghana, for example, the revenue base has remained rather narrow: over 50 per cent of revenues has depended on only four commodities, namely cocoa, a major export crop (15 per cent), petroleum (25 per cent) and alcohol and tobacco (12 per cent).
More generally, sales taxes may be collected on broad categories of goods and services. Jordan, for example, sought to broaden its tax base and improve the efficiency of the tax system when it switched in June 1994 from a consumption tax to a general sales tax (GST) for all manufactured goods and all imports, and in September 1995 it extended the list of services subject to GST, while also raising the basic rate from 7 to 10 per cent. The Government also planned to gradually convert the GST to a value-added tax.
Indeed, a value-added tax (VAT) has increasingly been introduced to replace the sales tax. It applies a percentage tax not to the value of the sales or output, but to the value that an enterprise adds to the value of the material inputs it begins with. If the same rate of tax is applied across the economy, the VAT is thought to distort market prices and economic decisions less than sales taxes, in the sense that the VAT does not provide incentives for anyone particular economic activity over another. Most European economies have adopted the value-added tax as a main source of tax revenue, at a statutory rate of between 15 and 25 per cent.
However, there are drawbacks to the VAT: it is an administratively demanding tax. Not only must it be collected from each covered enterprise, but there are typically exemptions or refunds of VAT on exports and other special classes of goods and services. Administering this system was rather complicated for Kazakstan, for example, which introduced a VAT under the 1995 Tax Code at a rate of 20 per cent (with certain limited exceptions) on all turnover within Kazakstan and all imports, including capital equipment. Foreign investors indicated that the imposition of VAT on imported capital equipment significantly increased the cost of doing business in Kazakstan owing, in particular, to problems in receiving VAT refunds on a timely basis. In response, the Kazak Government experimented with a new procedure beginning in October 1995 and since made permanent - under which any registered enterprise could import any item on a list of goods and equipment without having to immediately pay the VAT tax on the item. The importing entity had to fill out a short "Obligation declaration" form. The importer would give this form to the customs officials in lieu of the VAT owed. The procedure permitted the importer to claim a VAT credit on the next VAT statement in an amount equal to the VAT owed.
Si;m,:,lij"yi;ng the tax code and tax rates The simplification of tax codes, which make them easier and cheaper to administer, the removal of tax exemptions in order to reduce distortions, and the reduction in the highest rates of direct taxes, which serve as a disincentive to economic activity, have been features of many changes in tax regimes in recent years.
One case in point was the introduction of indexation in order to prevent average rates of income tax from rising owing to inflation. Inflation has this effect when there is a progressive income tax structure, that is to say, when higher incomes are taxed more heavily. This was the case in the United States, for example, where each taxpayer's annual income was divided into brackets and higher rates of tax were imposed on the higher brackets of income. When inflation rates rose to unaccustomed levels in the 1970s in the United States, the rising nominal incomes pushed households into higher income tax brackets (in other words, income ranges with higher marginal tax rates). The extent of this "fiscal drag" was felt to be inappropriate - it at least had been unintentional and so there was broad support for tax cuts in 1981, 1982 and 1983, which were adopted in the Economic Recovery Act of 1981, as well as for the indexing of annual adjustments to tax brackets to reflect inflation which began in 1984. However, the decline in inflation in the 1980s was considerably more rapid than anticipated, making the tax revenue forgone more generous than expected. Beginning, however, with the Tax Reform Act of 1986 and then the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Acts of 1990 and 1992 (see below), these tax cuts were reversed.
The spreading resort to indirect taxes, including the VAT, as noted above, has often been accompanied by a reduction in direct tax rates (for example, taxes on income), marking a shift in the emphasis of revenue collection from direct to indirect taxation. One reason for this shift has been concern about the disincentive effect of high personal and corporate income tax rates, as opposed to, say, a beneficial savings incentive that arises from a consumption tax. This has been a major consideration in Japan, in particular, which needs to secure an adequate revenue stream in the face of a shrinking ratio of working to total population and growing social security obligations, as discussed above.
Indeed, this lay behind the increase in the consumption tax from 3 to 5 per cent in April 1997.46 In addition, the fact that indirect tax collections vary less than direct taxes over the economic cycle helps to smooth the stream of government revenue, and this is another attraction to the Government of Japan.
The prime disadvantage of the shift from direct to indirect taxes is that the latter tend to be regressive. That is, by paying the same amount of tax, the poor pay a larger share of their income in VAT when they make a given purchase than do the rich. From an equity perspective, progressive taxes that take a higher share of the income of rich than of poor people are commonly preferred socially. Also, if rich and poor benefit equally from public services, direct tax structures that have rates that increase with income can be a powerful tool for redistributing income from the rich to the poor. On the other hand, high marginal tax rates on upper-income families have been reduced in recent years in some countries on the grounds that at such high levels the rates discouraged economic activity or forced it underground or overseas.
In Jordan, for instance, the maximum rate of tax on personal income was reduced from 50 to 30 per cent and on corporate income from 55 to 35 per cent, as part of the 1995 tax reform that included the increase in the general sales tax noted above. In addition, tax holidays (in other words, temporary exemptions) were eliminated (except for investment in the less developed regions of the country) and tax deductibility was limited to net interest payments.
Similarly, in 1985, New Zealand increased expenditure taxes, imposing a goods and services tax at the uniform rate of 10 per cent, and reduced the top personal income tax rate from 66 to 48 per cent.
The republic of Kazakstan also recently made a major effort to revise its tax laws. To avoid the problem of a proliferation of regulations arising from the enactment over time of piecemeal tax laws, it developed a comprehensive tax code to overhaul the tax regime and place it within a single law. Subsequent modifications of the tax code would require the modification of that one piece of legislation. This approach forces decision makers and economic agents to focus on a set of complex and controversial policy reform issues at one time.
While such an approach does make for a more systematic arrangement, it also causes the process of developing the legislation and moving it through the executive and legislative branches to be an extremely difficult and time-consuming one. In this case, the Kazak Tax Code of 1995 was enacted by presidential decree and not by Parliament.
J(,ai~iinf!4 tax collection effectiveness It is one thing to have legislated an elaborate tax structure and, sometimes, something quite different to collect tax revenues as anticipated. The problem can be illustrated in extreme form by the experience of the transition economies. In the Russian Federation, the tax structure had put considerable reliance on VAT and on corporate taxes, especially on the industrial sector, rather than on personal income taxes. When the economy collapsed at the outset of the transition process, led by a very steep fall in industrial production, it had an immediate effect on tax revenues. With a complex set of inter-enterprise sales and purchases and with difficulty collecting payments for goods sold, finns sought to remain in operation by building up large inter-enterprise arrears, plus arrears on tax payments.
In this case, the solution to the Russian Federation's fiscal revenue problem clearly did not include further increases in tax rates on enterprises, which would be seen as confiscatory and would serve only to shrink the effective tax base further, as firms would have yet stronger incentives to exit the formal economy. Instead, efforts have focused on improved collection of existing taxes. Thus, the Russian Federation recently created a "tax police" and introduced individual income tax declarations. In addition, a new tax code, due to be introduced in 1997, is to significantly reduce the tax burden on corporations.
The non-payment of taxes in the Russian Federation and other transition economies has stemmed not just from a deliberate breaking of the law by individuals and companies. As these countries were rapidly developing new institutional structures, their tax obligations were often unclear. In the case of the Russian Federation, a highly centralized State is being replaced by one that gives greater responsibility, including the authority to raise taxes, to its regions. By a decree of December 1994, the President empowered subnational governments of all levels to introduce their own taxes. The net effect was that enterprises often could not predict what their overall tax obligations would be.
The scope for improvement in tax collection is often also large outside of the special situation of the transition economies. The Philippines, for example, underwent a major tax reform in 1986, which altered and simplified taxes and introduced a VAT. The World Bank estimated, however, that tax collection under the new system fell short of "potential" by 50 per cent for personal income tax, 60 per cent for corporate income tax and 50 per cent for VAT.47 By the early 1990s, however, tax collection improved significantly, owing to improved tax administration and reduced tax evasion. Indeed, as a share of GDP, taxes collected from these three sources almost doubled from 1990 to 1994, together amounting to almost 10 per cent of GDP in the latter year.48
In Nicaragua, much of the success of the "Plan Lacayo" that was launched in March 1991 depended on the enforcement of existing tax laws, on imposing severe penalties for tax evasion and on improving tax administration. Although the Government decided not to attempt an ambitious reform of the tax system, it did succeed in raising tax revenue from 14.8 per cent of GDP in 1990 to 21.2 per cent in 1991 and 24.7 per cent in 1995.49
The granting of "tax amnesties" has also been a tool for expanding tax collection.
That is, Governments offer to waive their fines and penalties for noncompliance with the tax laws to all individuals who pay their outstanding taxes within a stated period. Not only does this bring in revenue from taxpayers who wish to clear their legal status, but it brings the individuals back into the taxpaying stream. In Ireland, for example, tax amnesties were granted twice: in 1988 and 1994. The first one increased tax revenue by 6 per cent.
These examples can serve only to scratch the surface of the myriad issues in revenue enhancement measures.50 The political economy as regards enacting the reforms is also quite germane, since the country has to reach a point where the need for change is accepted and the government then has to have the capacity to act.
Politics of a sound fiscal positiion Experience shows that keeping to a strict budgetary regimen is difficult.
Reducing a structural deficit is perhaps the most difficult challenge of all, especially when the cuts have to be in programmes that benefit constituencies differently and when offsetting gains for the groups that lose out are hard to identify.
Sometimes, Governments have sought to make the process easier by tying their hands with firm, legislated targets. Typically, it has not been that simple.
Successive in the United States Through much of the 1980s, the federal Government of the United States grappled with budget deficits that had been substantially enlarged by the tax cuts in the early years of the decade. As can be seen in figure VI.2, there was some progress in reducing the deficits in the second half of the 1980s, albeit not by the amounts that were expected. The deficit then grew again, owing to the economic recession of 1990-1991, after which more substantial progress was made. The less successful 1980s strategy was embodied in the GrammRudman-
Hollings (GRH) Acts of 1985 and 1987. They set specific deficit targets on a year-by-year basis, with the goal of reaching budget balance over the succeeding six years. Across-the-board cuts in discretionary spending were authorized in the case of deficit overshoots.51
These acts did not achieve their objective: overall, the federal deficit was
$230 billion larger over the period 1986-1989 than originally targeted. One of the major deficiencies was the focus of the GRH process on the budget year alone, that is to say, on a short time-horizon. This led to postponement of large reductions in the deficit to later years. To justify smaller adjustments, increasingly optimistic economic assumptions were used in projecting future deficits.
Indeed, the annual average correction to the budget forecast rose from $8 billion in the four years before the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings Act took effect to
$36 billion in the six years afterward.52 Also one-off measures like asset sales and questionable accounting practices, such as shifting payments from one fiscal year to another or moving some expenditures off-budget, were followed.
Such measures showed an improvement in the current position, but did nothing to lower the deficit over the longer run.
Accordingly, in later years, when there was no way to further delay the adjustment, the reductions necessary to achieve the targets became unrealistically large. In the 1991 budget, cuts of 34.5 per cent in affected defence accounts and 31.5 per cent in non-defence accounts would have been required to stay on target.53 Another difficulty with the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings Acts was that by concentrating on cutting discretionary spending, they avoided changing mandatory spending, an alteration which required new legislation; but it was mandatory spending that was a major source of the deficit problem.
The United States was more successful in achieving budget reduction as a result of the enactment of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Acts of 1990 (OBRA '90) and 1993 (OBRA '93), which were multi-year deficit-reduction packages, including both expenditure cuts and tax increases. The tax increases were imposed largely on households in the top fifth of the income distribution.
Effective federal income tax rates for upper-income groups became as high as those existing before the 1980s tax cuts. Tax increases accounted for about one half of the total deficit reduction.
From a budget process perspective, these Acts introduced certain important innovations. They abandoned deficit targets and added two new features to budgeting procedures. First, annual limits or "caps" were established on discretionary outlays for fiscal years 1991 through 1998. The caps barely allowed discretionary programmes to grow in nominal dollar terms over the entire period.
The second new feature was a "pay as you go" procedure for linking revenues and entitlements. Mandatory spending (other than Social Security, deposit insurance and interest on the public debt) was lumped together with revenues and the following constraint was imposed: any expansion in mandatory programmes would have to be funded by cutbacks in existing mandatory spending or by increases in taxes. Likewise, any tax cuts would have to be offset by other tax increases or by savings in mandatory spending.
The OBRA '90 and '93, as well as the improved economic climate, helped cut the deficit from $290 billion (4.9 per cent of GDP) in 1992 to $107 billion (1.4 per cent of GDP) in 1996, the lowest level in 17 years. For only the second time in the twentieth century, the federal budget deficit has declined for four straight years. Moreover, the primary balance has been in surplus since 1995 and the debt-to-GDP ratio has begun to stabilize.
This notwithstanding, the Administration and the Congress pledged to push further and fully eliminate the federal budget deficit by the year 2002. Since both major political parties have pledged to cut taxes and since discretionary spending has already been cut back sharply, the bulk of the remaining adjustments have to fall on the mandatory spending programmes. The cuts have already begun to fall on major social programmes, especially those that financially assist the poor. Even so, as under the GRR process, sacrifices are not being spread evenly, but largely postponed until a time closer to 2002. Ralf of the total five-year deficit reduction is expected to appear in 2002 itself; three quarters of the cuts would take place in the last two years. Also like the GRR experience, the current plan includes revenue gains from asset sales and shifting of tax receipts to 2002 from later years. Moreover, it is well understood that the budget would return to deficit after 2002 as more and more of an ageing population moved into retirement years.
Even while there is no economic argument as such for moving the United States federal deficit all the way to zero,54 the track record of the GRR-type approach to achieving the target is not encouraging. Indeed, some Congressional representatives have sought stronger means to ensure that the deficit would be eliminated, namely, amending the United States Constitution to require this. Those opposed to that suggestion argue that it would restrict unnecessarily the ability of the Government to function, that it would worsen economic recessions and that it might spawn major efforts to hide expenditures and tax relief in off-budget measures, thereby severely reducing the transparency of the entire budget process. The lesson of OBRA is that politically effective budgeting reform entails forging a workable consensus that leads to a package of concrete decisions to be implemented while the consensus is effective and while the legislature is in office to receive the support or displeasure of the voters for the actions taken.
The case Zealand New Zealand's Fiscal Responsibility Act of 1994 (the accounting aspects of which were discussed in box V.l) is another example of legislation designed to impose a legal obligation on government to maintain a sound fiscal position.
The Act sets out five principles of responsible fiscal management: to reduce total public debt to "prudent levels" by ensuring a fiscal (operating) surplus; once debt has reached prudent levels, to maintain those levels by ensuring, on average, a fiscal surplus over "a reasonable period of time"; to achieve and maintain the net worth of the Government at levels that provide a buffer against future factors that may impact the net worth adversely; to manage prudently the fiscal risks facing the Government; and to pursue policies that are consistent with a reasonable degree of predictability about the level and stability of tax rates for future years.
Unlike the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings Acts, the New Zealand legislation did not prescribe any numerical fiscal targets to be achieved over a time-frame.
The Act did not define "prudent levels" or "a reasonable period of time". The fiscal authorities are given the flexibility to interpret these wordings in the context of prevailing economic conditions. Furthermore, the Act allows the Government to make temporary departures from these principles, provided it explains fully the reasons for the departure and how and when fiscal positions are to be restored to meet the principles.
The New Zealand legislation also introduced specific disclosure requirements on the intentions and objectives of fiscal policy and increased the frequency of reporting. A Budget Policy Statement, which discusses strategic priorities for the upcoming fiscal year and long-term fiscal objectives, must be presented three months before the budget is due. The presentation of the budget must be accompanied by a Fiscal Strategy Report, assessing the consistency of the current fiscal position with respect to the Government's intention in the last Budget Policy Statement and analysing the likely development of fiscal variables 10 years into the future. The Government must also produce a halfyear Economic and Fiscal Update and a Fiscal Update towards the end of the fiscal year. In short, the Government's fiscal position and its changes quickly become available and the information is more transparent. The underlying theory is that a well-informed general public will be an important watchdog over the proclivities of legislators to succumb to short-term political expediency at the expense of long-run fiscal responsibility.

While New Zealand's approach is, in essence, an appeal to the informed reason of the public and the OBRA approach in the United States is, in essence, one of forcing trade-offs on legislators, the approach to which the EuropeaIi Union is about to tie itself involves heavy discipline. At its December 1996 summit, the European Council adopted the "Stability and Growth Pact", which sets out how the Union will enforce budget discipline on member States after Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) begins to operate. According to the Pact, the government deficit and debt targets that are part of the entry criteria for EMU (discussed in box V2), will continue to apply to member countries after EMU begins.
The procedures to be followed will have two dimensions. First, there will be clear and detailed surveillance of each member country's budget process. Each country will prepare multi-annual stability programmes which will be subject to endorsement by the Council of Economic and Finance Ministers (ECOFIN) and made public. The European Commission and ECOFIN will monitor implementation of the programmes and recommend policy changes if it appears that the targets of the programmes are not being met.
If a member country exceeds the deficit target, the Commission will start a process of ministerial reviews that can lead to deadlines for national policy response and sanctions if the deadlines are not met. Not every departure from the 3 per cent budget ceiling will start a disciplinary process in motion. Any fall in GDP of 2 per cent or more in a year of excessive deficit will automatically be deemed "exceptional". If GDP falls by less than 0.75 per cent in a high-deficit year, the presumption is that an excessive deficit has to be corrected, although natural catastrophes and other circumstances could also lead to the year's being classified as "exceptional". If GDP fell by an intermediate amount, the Council (a summit body) would determine how to treat the deficit.
If a member State's excessive budget is not deemed exceptional and if the recommended policy changes are not implemented adequately, the Government in question faces financial sanctions. It would have to make anon-interest bearing deposit with the Community by the end of the year following the one in which the deficit first occurred. If the deficit remained excessive, the deposit would become a fine two years later. The deposit would be 0.2 per cent of GDP, plus a sum based on the amount by which the country's budget deficit exceeded the 3 per cent target.
There is also a maximum amount of the deposit, 0.5 per cent of GDP, but it seems unlikely that any deposit will ever be made or any fine paid. One way to make the deposit would be to transfer cash from the Government account to an EMU account. If the cash was unavailable, the funds would have to come out of current flows. There are only two possible ways in which it could make the nori-interest-bearing deposit. First, it could sell bonds, presumably denominated in Euros (the new European currency), at what would probably be a very high interest rate given the likely market reaction to its difficult situation with the rest of the Community. Second, it could cut back on some expenditure that it had already refused to cut back on, or raise some tax that it had already refused to raise, so as to lower the deficit. If the situation deteriorated to the point where actual sanctions began to be imposed, choice from among these options would appear very difficult. It would more likely provoke a major political crisis in the Union, perhaps including withdrawal from EMU or the Communityentirely.
During the year between the time the deficit violation takes place and the deposit sanction is invoked, several sets of interactions between the Government and the Community unfold. For the Government to defy the Community and reach the sanctions stage, it would likely have either strong domestic popular support or none, given the gravity of what was about to occur. It seems, in other words, that if the member countries of EMU maintain the 3 per cent budget deficit ceiling, it will not be owing to a fear of sanctions; rather, it will reflect citizen acceptance - and thus legislative acceptance - of the political commitment to the budget targets. Maintaining the budget deficit ceiling will be understood to be the price required to build mutual confidence in all the participating States. The price would be paid because participation in EMU was seen to be worth the sacrifice of fiscal deficit financing.
The fact that Governments felt that the realization of the EMU required a ceiling on fiscal imbalances itself implied that the new economic structure and set of disciplines were incomplete. From the points of view of definition and measurement addressed in chapter V, the target for fiscal balance embodied in EMU is largely arbitrary; it is also unalterable, and the escape clauses give very limited flexibility. Moreover, looking to the future, the inevitable positive or negative deviations from any planned fiscal balance mean that, in practice,
Governments will have to set a target even lower than that prescribed. Even in the present period, when many feel a great incentive to do so, difficulties are being encountered in reaching the de jure target. If, in future, domestic difficulties arise, member Governments' accountability to their national constituen cies is likely to make the de jure ceiling even more of a challenge to sustain.
For example, if difficulties arise in several member States simultaneously, the government leaders concerned, meeting in the Council, will be hard-pressed to force these countries, and thus the Community as a whole, into a significant and economically unnecessary economic contraction. The fiscal target is therefore likely to be applied more flexibly in practice than what was envisaged when it was established.
When it comes to actually changing fiscal policy, Governments act in different ways. The political, economic and social circumstances in each country, as well as the international political and economic context, are important determinants of how the fiscal situation is perceived hy the Government and the populace, the kinds of policy responses that are attempted, and the changes that result.
Fiscal reform is a process that takes place over several years. A need for change is recognized at the political level. Corrective actions are then taken, frequently after some delay. However, the measures often fall short of fully solving the prohlem. The need for additional policy steps is then recognized, perhaps after a delay or perhaps immediately. New measures are implemented, and so on. Mter some numher of cycles, spread over long or short periods of time, a package of policies is adopted that succeeds in solving the perceived prohlems.
However, the need for reform inevitahly arises again, sometimes owing to an external shock, and the process hegins anew.
The dynamics of reform in action are complex and hest studied hy analysing actual experiences. Although there is much that is unique in any country "story", there are also hroader issues that may he ohserved. The present chapter thus offers narratives for a selection of country reform cases, one drawn from each of the main analytical and geographical groupings of countries.
Economists may be able to think abstractly about how they would design the economic functions of government and the fiscal system to support it, but this is not how Governments and their fiscal systems are designed - or more correctly, redesigned - in practice. Nor does a new system emerge smoothly or simply out of internal conflict and revolutionary change. Even where the old system collapses, the new one is built on the old and not from scratch. There is no time to stop, form a committee, agree to a new design, disassemble the old State and then recreate the new one according to the new design. The Government has to function every day, or at least try to function. Revolutionary change is messy, difficult and requires considerable time to reach an effective working model of the new design, let alone a working consensus that reform is on the desired path. Meanwhile, the Government undertakes expenditures, collects revenues, and perhaps runs unsustainable deficits that require consolidation.
A case in point is fiscal consolidation in the Russian Federation, which as in other transition economies - has been qualitatively different from fiscal adjustment in established market economies. New state institutions had to be designed and built in such a way as to compensate for and overcome the deep legacy of administrative economic policy-making, as well as to meet the requirements of an emerging market economy. Indeed, fiscal discipline as a central macroeconomic policy issue became a material concern only with the start of transition to a market economy. Under the central planning system, rigid and omnipresent administrative controls of real flows of goods and services had left financial resource movements and prices almost as a matter of accounting. Fiscal policy as such did not exist, something that is certainly far from the case today.
A notional deficit appeared in the budget of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR) beginning in the 1970s with the launching of a number of costly projects (defence build-up, major regional development projects and others).' With the start of perestroika and the gradual relaxation of the administrative grip on the economy, fiscal deficits grew perceptibly. Enterprises were permitted to retain an increasing share of their revenue and tax revenue fell accordingly. At the same time, the 1986 drop in international oil prices reduced revenue from oil exports, while the Soviet budget had to sustain huge unplanned expenditures for the Chernobyl nuclear clean-up. Further liberalization of the economic mechanism, as exemplified in particular by the 1988
Law on Enterprise which permitted firms to contract the prices for their output and gave them significant control over their wage bill, led to further declines in government revenues. Subsequently, the prices for agricultural products purchased from farmers were raised while the level of retail prices were preserved, and this swelled the implicit subsidy of agriculture. On top of this, minimum pensions were increased 25 per cent and an earthquake in Armenia again necessitated unplanned outlays. In January 1990, the new Government of the USSR raised industrial wholesale prices by more than 50 per cent while keeping retail prices intact. This entailed yet another significant increase in subsidies, well beyond what could be sustained even with a newly imposed 5 per cent nationwide sales tax.
By the end of the 1980s, the Government deficit had swelled to some 9 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP). The deficits were financed by borrowing from the State Bank, which was also underwriting credit expansion by the banking system to the industrial sector. As a result, central bank credit emission - that is, new money creation - rose from under 3 per cent of GDP in 1986 to over 14 per cent in 1990. In a market economy, when the monetary issue grows faster than the value of production at fixed prices, either the additional money is spent on further increases in output or prices rise (or there may be some combination of the two). However, when there was excess money creation under central planning, in other words, when most prices were administratively fixed and supplies were also largely set administratively, then the excess money had to go somewhere else. It either leaked into and stimulated increases in the volume and prices of goods and services produced in the informal economy or the excess funds were held as cash or savings balances.2
Already in 1990, the unsustainability of the fiscal imbalances had been realized, but serious corrective measures were not attempted until retail prices were administratively raised 55 per cent on average in April 1991. After this, the momentum leading to the dissolution of the Union accelerated. The unpopular character of the measures seriously undermined the authority of the Union Government, which facilitated the efforts of the increasingly insurgent leadership of the Russian Federation to establish an independent economic policy.
The main locus of economic decision-making in the USSR had been at the level of the Union Government. Each republic had its own budget, but most decisions of a budgetary nature were made in Moscow. Each republic also had a branch of the State Bank of the USSR, but it served mainly administrative functions, as monetary policy was also made in Moscow. This changed in June 1991 when the Russian Federation declared itself sovereign and the Russian branch of the State Bank was converted into the Central Bank of Russia. An increasingly liberal credit and fiscal policy of the Russian Federation's Government and its new central bank - now also a credit emission institution then doomed the Union Government's attempts to implement its relatively restrictive fiscal and monetary policy.
Meanwhile, enterprises ceased their tax payments to the Union and in many cases did not pay the considerably lower taxes to the republic's Government either. The seeds of the future systematic and widespread tax evasion - and, more generally, open indifference to government proclamations - took root. In the event, the deficits in both the federal budget and the republic's budget mushroomed and were financed by massive credits from the two central banks, which also continued to underwrite large increases in enterprise credit.
Inevitably, there were dire macroeconomic consequences.
With the dissolution of the Soviet Union at the end of 1991, the burden of transition and the economic functions of the State fell wholly on the former republics. The next few years would be tumultuous, with output tumbling and inflation exploding in all the successor States, albeit with stabilization and growth returning in some countries, such as the Baltic republics, before others.
In the Russian Federation, annual inflation rates were reduced appreciably, although economic growth has remained elusive.
As described by World Economic Survey, 1993, "After several years of debate and hesitant half-measures, the Russian Federation entered the year (1992) with its command-economy structures almost completely non-operational, but not yet replaced by a new mechanism".3 Two main groups in the Government contended for the economic future of the Russian Federation. On one side were the reformers of varying degrees of militancy who came into government at different points. They sought a rapid transition to a liberalized and privatized economy in which economically meaningful prices would guide individual enterprise decision-making. In their view, the Government should have a limited economic role and sound macroeconomic policy would build the confidence of economic agents in the currency and in the future, thereby encouraging the long-term private investment so necessary for the ultimate success of transition. The contending group was an "industrial lobby", largely drawn from state enterprise management and its supporters in Government.
The members of the group feared the chaos that seemed to be growing under the new policy direction and sought primarily to reverse the decline in production through government assistance. They argued for undertaking market-oriented reforms at a slower pace, which, they claimed, was socially less disruptive.
Fiscal policy see-sawed back and forth from 1992 to early 1995, as one or another of the groups gained control of the fiscal or monetary machinery and, inter alia, either expanded budget subsidies and bank credits or curtailed them. However, the acceleration towards hyperinflation each time the "support of-industry" forces were ascendant did not help their cause and the reformers began to win the struggle, as important departures in fiscal policy were incrementally initiated.
Thus, in 1993, short-term state securities were introduced, as a new form of state financing that entailed a non-monetary avenue of deficit financing, as well as a new instrument for financial management in an increasingly marketoriented banking and enterprise sector. Also in 1993, the Law on the Budget declared that the financing of the deficit would be limited exclusively to noninflationary means. In the event, this provision was not followed, but it established an agreement on the desired direction for policy.
In September 1994, another attempt at fiscal correction was contained in the Government's programme for a "strict" fiscal policy with a pre-set and "limited" deficit. Financing of the deficit was to rely on revenue from the sale of state securities and outside financing from international financial institutions, with financing by the Central Bank of Russia discontinued completely.
In March 1995, prodded by the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the Government and the Central Bank of Russia issued a joint declaration on economic policy that stipulated a number of economic policy measures for macroeconomic stabilization. In the area offiscal policy, the declaration envisaged abolishing tax exemptions and subsidies to foreign trade, as well as prohibiting the executive organs of any level from making decisions that would increase the Government's financial obligations and the budget deficit. In short, internal macroeconomic policy coordination had been brought front and centre.
All in all, the introduction of non-inflationary instruments for financing the budget deficit, the commitment to a coordinated macroeconomic policy and a resolute rejection of the earlier reliance on central bank credits for deficit financing laid the foundation for the macroeconomic stabilization of 1996. The result was that a "moderately restrictive" monetary and fiscal policy led to a drop in inflation from 215 per cent in 1994 (December over December) to 131 per cent in 1995 and 22 per cent in 1996. Budget deficits were kept at the level of 3-4 per cent of GDP, although this understates the actual fiscal situation, since some Government payment obligations were not met and some expenditures were moved off-budget.4
Today, economic policy debates are looking beyond the goal of fiscal consolidation per se to structural and institutional aspects of transition. The new question, in other words, is whether the new fiscal position is sustainable.
Many of the cuts in public spending were abrupt and not situated within a programme for transition. Social spending, a crucial function of government, needs perhaps to be more effective rather than smaller; and the tax system that evolved in the past few years - high and changing tax rates imposed by multiple layers of authorities - may have unintentionally established strong incentives to displace activity into the informal sector, depriving the Government of part of what should be its regular revenue stream.
Moreover, the old debate between market reformers and proponents of "support for industry" who claim that further focus on budget consolidation would unnecessarily hinder the resumption of economic growth is still raging. Policy makers have to find ways, in other words, to preserve the fruits of their antiinflation drive while at the same time providing stimuli for economic growth and transition and for the maintenance of social peace. In short, the early cycles of fiscal reform are not yet complete.
A new economic strategy, even one that turns out to be a major success on several fronts for several years, usually does not anticipate all the policy tools and institutions required, and thus in time the need is recognized for further reform measures. China's economic reform strategy since 1978, as encapsulated in an aphorism by the late Deng Xiao Ping, its designer, has been to "cross the river by feeling for stones", that is to say, step by step, learning and responding as one goes. With the accumulation of experience in governing under the new strategy, some of the policies that aimed to implement it came to be questioned. The goals of the economic strategy did not change, but the policies to bring about the goals were adjusted in major ways. Far from setting off on another basic design, the new reforms were seen as steps needed to preserve the initial one from becoming unsustainable. The events leading up to China's 1994 fiscal reforms illustrate the process in action.
In November 1993, the Third Plenum of the Central Committee of the 14th Party Congress decided on a package of reform measures encompassing many areas in the economy, in order to bring about a new, more comprehensive stage of the transition to a socialist market economy.5 The changes included major fiscal and financial-sector reforms, which began to be introduced in 1994. The new policy direction that had been advanced in 1978 had produced remarkable rates of economic growth and change, but it also set in motion certain developments that by the early 1990s were increasingly seen to be unsustainable.
The basic design had been to devolve economic power away from the centre, and in this regard the strategy was very successful. However, it became clear that, as the strategy had not anticipated some policy outcomes, the introduction of certain new policy departures was warranted.
The narrative begins with the turning away from central planning in China in 1978. The Government sought to increase the efficiency and dynamism of the Chinese economy mainly by decentralizing decision-making and providing incentives for economic agents to behave according to the economic logic of a market environment. In the first stages of the reform, from 1978 to 1984, measures were largely targeted on the rural area and the agricultural sector, with efforts at reform of the industrial sector limited to a few experiments.
The fiscal consequences of reform during this period included a buoyancy in central government revenues, which rose as a share of general government revenue (see table VI!.I). The base of central government revenues was the profits and tax payments of large and medium-sized state industrial enterprises.
These rose substantially with the improvement in agricultural output (which increased production in the industrial sector) and the increase in agricultural incomes (which raised the demand for industrial products).6 With the decentralization of agriculture, on the other hand, non-central government revenues fared less well and overall general government revenue thus fell as a share of gross national product (GNP). Overall government resources, however, did not fall as a share of GNP in the early years of reform owing largely to the rise in extrabudgetary revenues. These included earmarked funds (special surcharges for specific purposes), enterprise funds (such as for capital depreciation), retained profits and welfare funds, and funds raised by state enterprises and institutions, such as through tuition or road-maintenance fees.
Beginning in 1985, however, urban areas and the industrial sector became the focus of the reform agenda. Measures included price liberalization and permission to establish non-state activities, including joint ventures with foreign investors, which were later actively encouraged. These measures extended decentralized decision-making, but they also eroded the revenue base of the Government. Perhaps even more significantly, they eroded the Government's ability to manage the economy at the macroeconomic level and to use the budget to reduce regional income inequality.
In other words, the industrial reforms introduced profit-sharing and management responsibility schemes, wherein enterprises retained either a pre-set share of profits (the profit-sharing case) or all profit above a contracted quota after taxes (the management-responsibility case). As a result, enterprises no longer handed over all their earnings to the Government. Also, after artificially low agricultural and raw material prices were raised, the profitability of state industrial enterprises fell, and this also reduced fiscal revenues. In addition, when decentralization measures reduced artificial barriers to entry and the degree of monopoly fell in some highly profitable sectors of the economy, the profits of state-owned enterprises (SOEs) and thus government revenues (both budgetary and extrabudgetary sources) were further reduced. Subsequent reforms extended market-type incentives to state enterprises themselves. As a result, the remitting of SOE profits to the Government was increasingly replaced by smaller SOE tax payments, although tax administration and enforcement institutions were quite underdeveloped.
The consequences of these reforms for government revenues can also be seen in table VII.l. Consolidated government revenues, which had been between 40 and 45 percent of GNP between 1978 and 1985, fell sharply.)
Budgetary revenues of central government have been most dramatically affected.
Some decline in the Government's share of GNP had been expected, as the central theme of reform was economic decentralization. It had been fundamental to the new strategy that the Government would loosen its control over the allocation of resources, which would naturally be manifested in a decreasing share of output under direct government control and thus a decrease in both revenues and expenditures of government.
Nevertheless, the actual revenue decline appeared excessive. Indeed, the World Bank judged China's expenditure on health, education and other social services that are crucial for sustained economic growth to be in need of expansion.
In a simulation study, the Bank concluded that adequate coverage for these underfunded areas would require additional government spending in an amount equivalent to 4.6 per cent of GDP. 8
One additional complication of the shift from government reliance mainly on revenues transferred as "enterprise income" to tax revenues stems from the fact that in China, as was not the case in most countries, tax collection had come to be administered mainly by local levels of government. Central to the centre-local fiscal relationship has been the scheme of revenue-sharing: a fiscal contract system had been established in which local governments either arranged a fixed revenue or subsidy quota with the centre (the Guangdong model) or agreed to hand over to the centre a pre-set share of targeted revenue (the Jiangsu model). In a manner similar to that of enterprise contracting, local governments could retain revenues above the contract quota or keep a larger share of revenues if revenue growth exceeded the rate specified in the contract.
The nature of the contracting system made the centre's revenue stream income inelastic, since incremental revenues from faster national income growth were either retained by local authorities or transferred by them in reduced percentages to the centre. This thus caused the decline in the central Government's share in revenue collection noted above. As a result, the central Government repeatedly found itself short of revenues to meet the demand for expenditure.
Moreover, the centre's ability to use fiscal measures for macroeconomic stabilization purposes was severely eroded under the fiscal contract system, particularly by the late 1980s when the chief macroeconomic problem became how to reduce excessive aggregate demand and inflationary pressures. Once tax revenue contracts with lower levels of government had been fixed, there was little room to adjust tax rates. Furthermore, there were few fiscal policy handles for discouraging expenditure by the lower levels of government, whose revenues were being fed by strong economic growth.9
More precisely, as revenue collection and retention by regional and local governments were a function of the rate of local economic growth, the local authorities had a vested interest in promoting high rates of regional output expansion, regardless of the national macroeconomic situation. Whereas under central planning, most resources were passed to the centre and funds for ce~trally determined expenditures were passed back to the local level, under the increasingly decentralized Chinese system, expenditure of local governments became more directly constrained by the amount of revenues that could be earned and retained locally. There was thus a strong incentive for local authorities to establish and expand their own enterprises. Use of the resources generated by these firms was largely independent of central control and thus the incentive to expand them and then deploy their retained earnings in additional investment was clear.10
In addition, owing to the decentralization process, inequality in regional economic development acquired a new dimension that needed to be addressed.
In a country the size of China, with limited free geographical movement of population, one of the roles of the central Government is to use its resources to mitigate regional differences in income in order to meet the need for basic public services in all regions. In the process of fiscal reform, this equalizing capacity of the central Government had been weakened considerably.
All in all, the fiscal consequences of the decentralization strategy had been quite substantial. Of course, it decreased the amount of resources under government control, compared with the situation under central planning; but the fact that it also started and then continued to reduce the share of central government revenue in total government revenue kept weakening the role of the central budget, as against the local budgets of the economically booming areas.
Increasing reliance on self-financing enabled economically more developed regio~s, in particular the coastal provinces, to spend more in support oflocal development, thus reinforcing the rising regional income inequality.11
In sum, by the early 1990s, the fiscal system in China had become politically and economically unsustainable. Part of the 1994 policy changes thus aimed to strengthen the centre through tax reform. Under the old tax system, virtually all tax revenues except tariffs on foreign trade had been collected by local levels of government. Those revenues were partly passed up the governmental structure, from local county through province to central Government, as per a sequence of contractual agreements, as discussed above. Under the new tax assignment system, certain tax revenues were reserved for the centre, including the consumption tax, income tax paid by state enterprises owned by the central Government, and income tax paid by non-bank financial enterprises licensed by the central bank and the railways, all banks and insurance companies, plus taxes paid on offshore oil resources. Local governments would command revenues generated from personal income tax, income tax paid by local enterprises, capital gains tax on land and property sales, estate tax and stamp duty. In addition, the central Government would get 75 per cent of the valueadded tax and 50 per cent of the stock transaction tax.n Implementing such a major reform takes time, as it is quite complex and the interests of all levels of governments are affected. Also, as in many other developing countries, institutional capacity in tax administration is relatively weak in China. Nonetheless, the share of the central Government in total budgetary revenue increased substantially, from 22 per cent in 1993 to over 50 per cent in 1994 and 1995 (see table VII.l). In this regard, the new tax assignment scheme seems to be effective. Also, with the financial, banking and exchangerate reforms, and especially controls on credit emission, inflation has fallen from 24 per cent at its peak in 1994 to 3.3 per cent in 1996, while growth of GDP remains at the extremely strong level of about 10 per cent per year. On the other hand, during the transitional period 1994-1995, the ratio of budgetary revenue to GNP continued to decline, slipping from almost 14 per cent in 1993 to 12.0 per cent in 1994 and n.5 per cent in 1995. This seems to signal that the period of fiscal reform in China is not yet complete.
Sometimes it becomes widely apparent within a country that the macroeconomic situation is untenable and that the set of policies that were being pursued are not working. Most commonly, inflation rates rise and do not return to the range of acceptable values. Sometimes the economy stagnates and unemployment and a fall in real wages accompany the high inflation. It may be that the policy strategy being followed requires the implementation of a full set of government actions to be effective whereas only part of the set was deemed politically feasible. Whatever the reason, the failure of the policy becomes inescapable. Trying something new, however, may require a new government, a new electoral mandate and a new team of policy makers. This was the case in Argentina at the end of the 1980s.
In July 1989, a new President took office in the Argentinerepublic, after a decade of economic instability, high inflation, debt crisis and a sequence of failed policy efforts to correct the situation. 13 The President took office on the heels of a surge in inflation that reached almost 200 per cent in the inaugural month. However, business confidence was restored by the appointment of a well-known business leader as minister of finance and by the beginning of fiscal and financial reform. This seemed to stem the outflow of funds from the economy, and virtually stopped the associated sharp devaluation of the currency and the near-hyperinflationary rate of price increase. By October, the monthly inflation rate was only slightly above 5 per cent (see figure VI!. 1).
In December, however, inflation was again climbing rapidly, as the inadequacy of the fiscal measures taken had become clear. A new plan was instituted, but inflation kept accelerating, reaching almost 100 per cent in March 1990. Then, in April, a new attempt to curtail government expenditure and raise fiscal revenues was instituted. Inflation in April fell to only II per cent and by December 1990 it was less than 5 per cent.
The new Government and the country thus went through a learning period embodying two brief episodes of runaway inflation which could only have impressed upon all the relevant actors that real adjustments had to be accepted.
The lesson was an expensive one: in 1989 GDP fell 6 per cent and while output did not decline further in 1990, it did not rise either; also, more that $8 billion left the country in 1989, as measured on net financial account in the balance of payments and almost another $6 billion left in 1990, although $3 billion of this represented a mandated conversion of domestic obligations into dollar-denominated bonds. 14
Nevertheless, certain reforms had begun in those early years. At the heart of the reform was the acknowledgement by policy makers of something that Argentina's economic actors all knew, namely, that money creation had become a regular tool for financing the public-sector deficit. There would thus be little credibility in any anti-inflationary monetary policy without a major fiscal reform. The first reforms implemented in 1989 turned out to be less effective than first expected, but deeper reforms followed. Viewed another way, it took time for the momentum of the reform movement to build and for the revenue results to become visible.
More precisely, tax administration and control began to be tightened in 1989 and a new tax penalty law was adopted in 1990 to deter traditionally widespread tax evasion. A broader and uniform value-added tax was adopted for goods in February 1990. It was extended to services in November of the same year and was gradually raised substantially afterwards. In 1991 and 1992, these steps plus the revenue gain from the beginning of economic recovery led to markedly improved tax collection, allowing reduction of more distortionary taxes and an overall simplification of the tax system.
Meanwhile, the Government also sought to contain expenditures. A legal and administrative machinery to reduce the federal bureaucracy was set up in February 1990 and in November the state telephone company was privatized. By 1994, the federal civil service had been reduced 50 per cent (although a large portion of the staff were reabsorbed over time at state and municipal levels) and several large state enterprises had been sold off, including two television stations, the state airline, long-distance cargo lines, defence industries, the largest distributor of electricity, power-generating companies, ports, reinsurance and the state oil company. In addition, government debt-servicing obligations were reduced by debt/equity swaps (largely associated with privatization) and completion of the final debt-restructuring exercise with Argentina's foreign commercial bank creditors. Other measures addressed operations of the social security pension system and the financial imbalances of the provincial governments.
Efficiency and development strategy concerns motivated many of these measures, largely revolving around increasing the role of competitive market forces in the economy; but budget correction was understood to be essential.
Even so, the traditionally poor Argentine fiscal record damaged the credibility of the Government and inflationary expectations remained high at first even after the budget deficit began falling. The innovation to address this problem entailed an extreme policy change.
A new finance minister was appointed at the beginning of 1991 (although he was already part of the policy team) and on 21 March 1991 a completely new monetary policy was initiated. In effect, the possibility of new central bank financing of the fiscal deficit was eliminated by turning the bank into a currency board whose main mandate was to buy and sell foreign exchange at a fixed exchange rate, one that would require an act of Congress to change. This meant that the only way new local currency could be added to the economy was if the inflow of foreign exchange to Argentina exceeded the outflow, with the central bank buying up the excess with new pesos.15 The inflation rate then, indeed, fell rapidly and the exchange rate has remained fixed since then, albeit at the expense of having to adjust relative prices and wages wholly through domestic price changes in lieu of devaluation.
The macroeconomic stabilization plan worked in the sense that fiscal deficits were brought down, inflation was reduced to low single-digit levels and, at least from 1991 until 1994, output grew strongly. Nevertheless, the measured unemployment rate doubled from 1990 to 1994 and real wage rates stagnated. Moreover, deep cuts had been made in public investment - the main adjustment variable in discretionary expenditure policy in Argentina and this has inevitably led to the deterioration of the quality of basic social services. However, the Government was re-elected and the overall policy continued to be supported, even during 1995 at which time the policy stance came under severe pressure when Argentina was hit by the contagion effect of the Mexican peso crisis.
If the Argentine situation thus remained difficult for many, the memory of the severity of the crisis at the beginning of the decade seemed to remain alive for all. Secondly, and directly related to the first point, as opposed to previous fiscal adjustment plans, this one enjoyed a large base of political and social consensus, of which the Government took full advantage in the implementation of several drastic measures. The speed and simultaneity of the implementation of measures on several fronts were unprecedented. In some cases, in particular as regards some of the privatization programmes, the imperative to act quickly may have come at the expense of acting most efficiently or equitably.l. However, the policy measures were understood to be part of a grand reorientation, aimed not only at correcting the existing disequilibria, but at fully redefining the role of the State in the economy after the old role had been discredited.
In short, implementation of fiscal consolidation as part of a broader adjustment and reform programme appears to have reinforced the credibility of the Government commitment to the plan and bolstered its political support. On the other hand, recent public opinion polls indicated eroding support for current policies and the Government faces new elections in the second half of 1997 where the issue will again be addressed.

Some policy makers face a special challenge in fiscal policy design that their counterparts in other countries are happily spared, namely, having to confront the deeply run-down condition of the basic public institutions of the country. Perhaps the institutions functioned well at some point in the past, but over time incentives to maintain them evaporated. Perhaps the purchasing power of civil service salaries fell so low that workers needed to work other jobs to survive, including during office hours. Perhaps the occasional practice of graft became the culture of graft. Perhaps the most promising of the younger generation emigrated. Perhaps individuals with investable funds took them out of the country. Perhaps the physical infrastructure deteriorated from years and years of poor maintenance.
In this kind of situation, reforming political forces start with what they inherit and work from ~here. Indeed, they will need to build credibility and support as they go. Even if there is a strong popular constituency for reform, the Government's capacity to develop policy may be limited by the dearth of human resources still in the country, not to mention financial shortages. In this kind of situation, the reform process would undoubtedly take a long period of time to put into effect and would merge into and become part and parcel of the development strategy itself.
This was very much the situation in Ghana in the early 1980s. When Flight Lieutenant Jerry Rawlings seized power on 31 December 1981, the country was in disarray. Per capita income had peaked in Ghana in 1974 and had fallen almost steadily since then, decreasing by about one third by 1983. Roads desperately needed repair; the railway that had once carried goods for export no longer functioned and the condition of the ports was not much better. Communications systems did not operate either. Inflation was over 100 per cent.
The ruling Provisional National Defence Council (PNDC), chaired by Mr.
Rawlings, at first followed a popular-nationalistic strategy to deal with the crisis, attacking the corrupt privileges of the elite, creating people's defence committees and workers' defence committees to return power to Ghana's people, and imposing price and wage freezes to control inflation. The drive to stop corrupt practices was very popular and had a measure of effect; but this meant that it disrupted the economic system as the system then functioned. The economic situation of the country thus continued to deteriorate. 17
PNDC had included a wide variety of political and economic views, including radical Marxist ones, but it soon turned to the Bretton Woods institutions for financial support and policy advice. The radical wing of PNDC had been unable to develop a viable strategy to deal with the economic crisis; nor was it able to raise financial assistance. Meanwhile, the situation reached catastrophic proportions in 1983 when a very severe drought and bushfires hit Ghana and an estimated 1 million Ghanaians had to return home from Nigeria. Something had to be done; the international community was ready to assist; and the population looked to the Government to deliver on reversing the economic decline..
Ghana began its Economic Recovery Programme (ERP) in April 1983. It was supported by a standby arrangement with IMF, followed up by a series of Fund and World Bank arrangements and considerable bilateral support that extended over many years. Ghana thus became one of the first countries in sub-Saharan Africa to adopt a comprehensive structural adjustment programme.
It entailed reductions of controls and correction of highly distorted prices, including higher retail prices for petroleum products and a sequence of devaluations of the exchange rate, followed by introduction of foreign exchange auctions in 1986. Such measures reduced incentives for smuggling and by bringing more economic activity into the legal economy, also raised public-sec.. tor tax revenues, as did the devaluations, which raised the local currency value of exports and imports. In addition, tax rates were restructured, civil service salaries were raised substantially and by late 1986 the civil service began to be retrenched, cost recovery for social services was enhanced, tax collection efforts were strengthened and compliance improved. The prices paid to Ghana's cocoa farmers were raised and 25,000 "ghost workers" were removed from the payroll of the Ghana Cocoa Marketing Board, followed in 1987 by the removal of 29,000 actual workers, almost 40 per cent of the staff.
By the end of 1984 and again in 1985, the new policy began to show results in rising GDP, export and import volumes and slowing inflation. Part of the initial results reflected the end of drought (measured GDP increases also reflected the fall in smuggling and the rise in legal activity); but the improved growth continued unabated long after these effects would have ended. Indeed, the spread between the parallel and the official exchange rate - and thus the smuggling incentive - fell from about 2,100 per cent in 1983 to 36 per cent by 1987.
Fiscal revenues rose (60 per cent of tax revenue was on international trade) and budget deficits fell. Three exceptional factors also contributed to the increase in government revenues: an improvement of the terms of trade in the mid-1980s, the higher income tax revenues as a result of higher civil service wages and a higher implicit petroleum tax as retail prices were left unchanged when international oil prices fell in 1986. On top of this, Ghana received concessional external assistance amounting to 2-3 per cent of GDP in the second halfof the 1980s.
As a result, government expenditure rose steadily in the 1980s, which was quite unlike the standard adjustment exercise - although the starting point for Ghana was also quite unlike the standard one. Expenditures on such items as health, education and public investment (particularly in infrastructure) increased as a percentage of GDP, as a percentage of government expenditures and in real terms during the 1980s. However, the increase was not monotonic and some social expenditures were cut. Most importantly, the wage component often increased while the component for goods and investment (such as for books, schoolrooms and drugs) declined. 19 Moreover, at the end of the 1980s, levels of the Government's social expenditures as a percentage of GDP were still below those reached in the mid-1970s and rather low compared with those of other developing countries.
All in all, there had been a considerable rush of deep reforms during much of the 1980s, over a period in which the Government perforce relied upon what was only a small group of highly competent and committed senior officials.
Indeed, the inherited situation meant that the Government's technical capacity was extremely stretched. As one author reported: "PNDC staff members spent a great deal of time compiling data requested by the (International Monetary) Fund, which left little time to draft arguments about the political, administrative, or economic feasibility of measures... the PNDC was so overworked in 1983-84 that it prepared thoroughly on only the multiple exchange rate system adopted in 1983...The team (was) acutely short of support staff and financial and technological resources, and these constraints were only marginally eased by the end of the decade.ma A similar sentiment was expressed in another study: "The middle and lower levels of the civil service provide precious little support for the top team...A particular weakness is failure to undertake preparatory policy analysis, setting out and appraising all relevant policy options. The inevitable result is instant, on-the-spot decision-making by the top leadership...
The lack of public debate on policy options intensifies this weakness.'''ll Despite this capacity constraint, the Government did not blindly agree to implement conditions set by the international financial institutions. Disputes arose between the Government and the institutions over several issues. There were also cases in which the Government first implemented measures that subsequently appeared as conditions under an agreement with the Bretton Woods institutions. Examples are cost recovery in the health sector and the introduction of the foreign exchange auctions in 1986.
Moreover, IMF and the World Bank themselves sometimes disagreed on how the balance between fiscal discipline and economic growth objectives should be struck, with IMF insisting on occasion that the view of the World Bank and the Government on how much public investment could be afforded was too optimistic. In any event, during the first phase of the ERP (up to 1987), when IMF took the lead role, the main thrust of the Programme was to achieve macroeconomic stability with fiscal adjustment playing an important part of the strategy.
However, fiscal adjustment required not austerity, but rather the ensuring that fiscal revenues rose faster than expenditures. From the very beginning, the Government also included the rehabilitation of the dilapidated economic and social infrastructure (for example, roads and schools) among its objectives, as it was considered crucial for an output response to the improved pecuniary incentives. Yet, stabilization had priority status during the period.
The Government was also acutely aware of the political dimensions of the sequencing and timing of reforms. The reform of state-owned enterprises, the civil service, and the Cocoa Marketing Board was rather limited during the first period of the ERP. This hesitation may have originated in the socialist background of the Government, opposition within PNDC, and the fear of a political and social reaction to the retrenchments that reforms would undoubtedly involve.23
That reforms were needed in these areas was, however, clear. Even before the launch of the ERP, PNDC had criticized the overstaffing at the Cocoa Marketing Board, as the overhead costs kept the producer price for cocoa too low, although the Government resisted privatizing the Board during the 1980s.
PNDC was also keenly aware of the drain on the budget by the loss-making state-owned enterprises and of the fact that many state-owned enterprises and the civil service were also overstaffed as a result of the heavy recruitment in the 1970s when cocoa prices had been high. Already in December 1983, the Manpower Utilization Committee had been set up to identify the extent of overstaffing in the public service and to execute redeployment.
In other words, whatever ideas the Government may have had about development strategy and the economic role of the State, the first order of business had to be getting the economy functioning again. This was accomplished.
Issues of structural change, downsizing, privatization and the like had to be largely pushed into the second stage of reforms. In particular, it undoubtedly would have been politically difficult had the Government started to retrench people earlier than it did, as the Economic. Recovery Programme itself still needed to gain political acceptance both within PNDC and in society at large.
The second stage of reform, however, is still a work in progress.
The country remains economically fragile, quite susceptible to terms-oftrade swings and with areas of deep poverty. It has also become dependent on aid flows, and the limited revenue raising power of government has left the budgetary situation delicate. Thus, while civil service salaries had been raised in the early years of the reforms in recognition of the need to adequately remunerate workers if they were to be expected to work diligently, the purchasing power of civil service salaries seriously eroded again over the 1980s. By the early 1990s, after some months of demonstrations, strikes and sporadic violence, and as elections approached in November and December 1992, civil service salaries were raised 80 per cent across the board; but this occurred at the same time as the Government faced lower-than-expected tax receipts from lower cocoa production and prices, lower petroleum tax receipts and sluggish corporate performance. On top of this, there was a shortfall in disbursements of budgeted external concessional finance of about $175 million. This created a new short-term budget adjustment problem and highlighted the need for a more elastic system of taxation.
One result was the substitution of a value-added tax for the sales tax in March 1995. However, the tax had to be withdrawn in June of the same year for further study after riots in May, leading to a number of deaths. Of course, more than a single policy innovation lay behind the strong popular reaction, and this serves to again underline the inescapable political dimension to fiscal policy-making.
The 1997 budget expected a surplus for the year, while also announcing that the value-added tax would be reintroduced in 1998. In 1996, there was a small deficit in the budget of 1.4 per cent of GDP. A surplus had been projected for 1996, but was not realized owing to unanticipated increases in public service salaries and the non-disbursement of $60 million in anticipated foreign grants.
In December 1996, the President was re-elected with a strong vote and his party won a large majority in the National Assembly. In addition to this popular mandate, Ghana seems increasingly to be seen as a possible location for regional offices of international corporations. Not only is this an indicator of how much distance Ghana has traversed, but it would add to the pressure for further raising the effectiveness and transparency of public administration, not least of all in the area of tax collection. The reformers have an opportunity to push far ahead with fiscal reforms.
Sometimes the economic environment in which fiscal policy is detennined is shaped in important ways by political forces. Changes in international political relations can provide economic opportunities or impose economic adjustment imperatives that are just as compelling as conventional economic changes, often more so. Usually, when political developments disrupt nonnal international economic channels, it is unclear how long the disruption will last and thus what type of policy change and how large a change are necessary. The experience of the Hashemite Kingdom. ofJordan over almost a decade of fiscal adjustment imperatives well illustrates the challenges of coping with such uncertainties.25
Jordan is a relatively small economy with traditionally close ties to the oilexporting countries of the Persian Gulf region. Throughout most of the 1970s and up to the mid-1980s, the economy depended heavily on those countries both for grants (averaging about 12 per cent of GDP) and for workers' remittances, which constituted the largest source of foreign currency. Growth in CDP averaged about 10 per cent per year in 1973-1983. Investment, both public and private, was high (ranging between 20 and 40 per cent of GDP),
&lthough much of the private investment was directed to housing construction (largely financed by Jordanians working abroad). Exports expanded steadily, particularly to Iraq during its eight-year war with the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Nevertheless, recourse to foreign and domestic borrowing was quite large, averaging about 10 per cent of GDP per year during the period.
Much of the borrowing served fiscal as well as balance-of-payments needs.
Thrcmghout most of this period, fiscal expenditure averaged nearly half of GDP, with public capital expenditure averaging 15 per cent of GDP between 1973 and 1983 and military outlays averaging more than 10 per cent over the same period. There were also heavy expenditures for the development of human resources. In addition, institutional inefficiencies and pricing policies, particularly in the energy and water sectors, imposed a significant burden on the budget.
Meanwhile, domestic fiscal revenue rarely exceeded 20 per cent of GDP and was insufficient to finance total expenditure. The system of taxes and tariffs on international trade was rife with inefficiencies, owing to widespread granting of exemptions, complexity of the tax structure, and inadequate collection and administration procedures.26
The boom ended in the middle 1980s as a result of the steep drop in international petroleum prices and the subsequent economic recession in neighbouring oil-exporting countries, which reduced foreign grants and remittance inflows from those countries. Coupled with the effect of rising international interest rates on what were in any case burgeoning debt-servicing obligations, considerable pressure was put on the external account and the fiscal position.
In 1988, GDP began to fall and central government net borrowing rose to 15 per cent of GDP. By the end of the year, foreign official reserves were virtually exhausted.27 Moreover, prospects for a return to the more advantageous international economic environment of the earlier years looked exceedingly dim.
In 1989, GDP plummeted 13.5 per cent, consumer prices rose 25 per cent (having been relatively stable in earlier years) and the Government confronted its macroeconomic crisis. It introduced a package of corrective measures as part of a medium-term adjustment programme, supported by a standby arrangement with IMF and a trade and industry adjustment loan from the World Bank. The programme aimed, inter alia, to regain a sustainable budget situation by 1993 and end the need for exceptional balance-of-payments financing by 1995. The dinar was devalued, external debt was rescheduled with foreign commercial banks (London Club) and official creditors (Paris Club) and fiscal adjustments began.
The authorities were fully convinced that they had to follow a drastically different economic strategy than in the past. Their plan would be guided by four main principles: first, redefine the role of the State and create a more dynamic private sector; second, reduce dependence on official grants and workers' remittances and develop a more internationally competitive economy with more markets outside the region; third, ensure that the reforms were politically credible to local and foreign private investors, as well as to international financial institutions and agencies; fourth, ensure that the reforms were socially acceptable by explaining to the public the short-term dislocations and longterm benefits and by. providing the poorer segments of society with compensatory mechanisms and social safety nets. The main elements of the programme included cutting expenditures and improving fiscal revenues to reduce the budget deficit, reforming the agricultural, water and energy sectors, restructuring the tariff and tax systems, containing the rate of credit expansion within limits consistent with inflation objectives, liberalizing l."estrictions on foreign exchange and on domestic and foreign investments and harmonizing investment incentives.
Nowhere in the Jordanian adjustment strategy, however, could provision have been made for the events that began in August 1990, when Iraq invaded Kuwait. The initial impact on Jordan entailed both a humanitarian imperative and a need to absorb new economic costs. Hundreds of thousands of thirdcountry nationals quickly crossed into Jordan from Iraq and Kuwait and were assisted first by the Government of Jordan and voluntary organizations and then by the international community once the great scope of the population movement became clear. In two months, over half a million evacuees passed through Jordan on their way to homes elsewhere in the Middle East and Asia, putting extreme pressure on limited local manpower resources and supplies to assist them. On top of the transients, some 300,000 Jordanians and Palestinians returned, increasing the local population by almost 10 per cent. Not only would these people cease being one of the country's main sources of foreign exchange,28 but they would have to be absorbed into an economy that was deep in economic recession and in the midst of a major fiscal adjustment programme.
Moreover, the Security Council, in its resolution 661 (1990), imposed obligations on Jordan, as on all other countries of the world, to cease international trade with Iraq, except for very limited exceptions, until the situation between Iraq and Kuwait was resolved. While the crisis and embargo imposed economic difficulties on a number of countries, its impact on Jordan was greater than on any other non-combatant country. First, Iraq was Jordan's main trade partner, taking about 20 percent of its exports. Second, Jordan's port of Aqaba had become a major trans-shipment point for Iraqi external trade, accounting for 71 per cent of the volume of imports handled by Aqaba in 1989. Third, the main truck route from Jordan, as well as from the Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey, to Kuwait and Saudi Arabia passed through Iraq and was thus interrupted.
Fourth, the tourist industry, a main source of income and employment, ground to a standstill. Fifth, political tensions rose during 1990 between Saudi Arabia and Jordan, as a result of which there was a virtual cut-off of trade with and via that country, and budgeted grant assistance from Saudi Arabia failed to materialize. Sixth, owing to the occupation, budgeted grant assistance from Kuwait itself was not delivered and provision of resources expected for some 14 projects funded by Kuwaiti-based development finance institutions was disrupted.
All in all, the losses attributable to the Kuwaiti situation and the embargo on Iraq were put at $1.3 billion in 1990 alone (almost a third of GDP).29
While many of the financial costs were offset by additional assistance and while relations with Saudi Arabia improved in 1991, the new economic realities still had to be absorbed by Jordan's economy. With the influx of returnees, for example, unemployment reached 25 per cent in 1991. Within a few years, this indicator would be almost halved. The embargo against Iraq, however, has been far from a temporary disruption. In 1992, Jordan relaunched its adjustment programme, with a new IMF standby arrangement and a new economic reform and development loan from the World Bank.
In the end, Jordan was able to maintain its overall strategy for adjustment.
In particular, fiscal deficits fell from over 20 per cent of GDP before the initial programme began to take effect to levels below 6 per cent of GDP since 1992 (see table VII.2). Most importantly, given the context, the Government was able to delay fiscal contraction; that is to say, owing to considerable emergency financial assistance in 1990 and 1991, Jordan was able to provide essential government services and sustain a fiscal deficit that remained above 17 per cent of GDP. In conjunction with the trade responses to the earlier devaluation and other developments, the foreign inflows also helped rebuild foreign exchange reserves. Confidence was maintained in the dinar and after the war a major inflow of savings of the returnees helped fuel a dramatic 16 per cent surge in the growth of GDP in 1992, led by a housing boom. That pace, of course, could not be maintained, but GDP growth has averaged 6.5 per cent a year SInce.
Jordan's fiscal consolidation could thus take place in an expansionary environment in part because of the substantial financial benefits Jordan received over several years. Very considerable flows began in 1991, mainly from the European Union (the Community as such and several bilateral donors) and Japan. Also, Jordan again rescheduled its Paris Club debt in 1992 and it reduced its commercial bank obligations through "well-executed debt buybacks and debt",30 followed by a debt and debt-service reduction operation (a "Brady deal") with its bank creditors in 1994. In addition, the United States of America and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland wrote off about $800 million in Jordanian debt in the wake of the October 1994 peace treaty with Israel (Treaty of Peace between the State of Israel and the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, of 26 October 1994.)31 Reflecting these developments, among others, government interest payments fell from 10.5 per cent of GDP in 1991 to 3.3 per cent in 1995, as may be seen in table VII.2.
These financial developments entailed balance-of-payments benefits as well as fiscal ones. Coupled with dynamic export growth to new markets, room was made for significant growth of imports, which were pulled in by the growing domestic economy as well as the effect of liberalized import controls and reduced tariffs. Meanwhile, with lower tariff rates but fewer exemptions and with rising imports, revenue from taxes on foreign trade rose as a share of GDP (see table VII.2). Reforms of the tax system also raised the take on other revenue sources. All in all, tax revenues as a share of GDP have risen by some 6 percentage points since the adjustment period began.
Government expenditures have traditionally loomed large in Jordan's economy.
The quality of the services provided by the public sector in Jordan is considered among the best in developing countries, with over 97 per cent of the population having access to electricity and safe drinking water. Other basic services, such as health and education, are considered generally good, and infrastructure is well developed. The challenge was to maintain - even improve - the services while reducing the cost of government. A number of measures were employed in this regard, including slow growth in salaries, reduced subsidies, less lending to public enterprises and cuts in military spending.
If it can thus be said that the crisis of 1989 has been overcome, it is also the case that additional reforms are in the agenda. While the government deficit has been reduced substantially, it is still at a level that can be sustained only if significant levels of foreign grant inflows are maintained. Ultimately, the Government needs to become self-sustaining. Indeed, additional measures on both the revenue and the expenditure side are under way or expected, including privatization of a number of state assets, as in the energy and agricultural sectors, telecommunications and transport, hotels and cement manufacturing.
Meanwhile, Jordan will once again face adjustment imperatives owing to further changes in its region. In the relatively short run, these are likely to include enhanced competition with Israeli firms in a more open regional economy and loss of seigniorage benefits when the dinar is replaced by a Palestinian currency in the West Bank and Gaza. In the longer run, however, the possibilities for economic dynamism in the region are great and Jordan should be poised to take advantage of them.
The difficulties that budget consolidation imposes on the population would be easier to bear (if not necessarily for all affected people), if national incomes and employment were growing rapidly. Typically, however, budget deficit reduction is one dimension of a contractionary stabilization plan. There seems to be a premium on, instead, designing a strategy for cutting budget deficits that would be part and parcel of a strategy for economic growth. In the second half of the 1980s, in part fortuitously, Ireland was able to combine fiscal consolidation with rising GDP growth rates.
In the early 1980s, it had become clear that Ireland's fiscal situation was getting out of hand. When corrective policy began in 1982, the general government deficit had reached 13.2 per cent of GDP. Since 1989, however although it took most of the decade to accomplish this - the deficit has been on the order of 2 per cent of GDP or less (see figure VII.2). Two distinct threeyear periods of fiscal contraction were undertaken: the first, from 1982 to 1984, reduced the deficit by almost 4 percentage points of GDP; the second, from 1987 to 1989, reduced the deficit by almost 7 percentage points of GDP.
The second episode was the more successful one in part because it was accompanied by increasingly strong economic growth. Indeed, after a slow period in the early 1990s, strong GDP growth resumed, averaging 8 per cent a year during 1994-1996 and earning Ireland the appellation of "Green Tiger".
Before the consolidation policy began in 1982, it had been preceded by a period of intense national public debate,. including three general elections in an 18-month period in 1981 and 1982. In June 1981, a coalition Government took power. The new Taoiseach (Prime Minister), Garrett FitzGerald, later described discovering the true state of the public finances that his Government had inherited with the 1981 budget of the outgoing Government: "Unless emergency action was taken, exchequer borrowing was likely to reach 20 per cent of GNP in the current year and almost 21 per cent in 1982. Furthermore - something we could not reveal to the public at that time without prejudicing our ability to borrow the huge sums that would still be needed while we were getting things under control - the Central Bank had turned down in mid-April a request from the Department of Finance for a loan of 350 million pounds."32
Thus, the fear of a solvency crisis impelled the search for a fiscal consolidation policy. FitzGerald's Government, however, did not last past January 1982.
Three major political parties took office in coalitions or individually in 1981 and 1982 and although each recognized the need for budget consolidation, agreement on a policy package proved difficult.
A set of measures was finally put into effect in 1982 and 1983, however, that aimed to return Ireland, after a period of several years, to the more traditional policy of balancing government current spending against current revenues and bOITowing to finance a sustainable capital budget. Most of the budget improvement was sought from increases in tax rates rather than spending cuts. The spending cuts largely took the form of postponement of capital spending. Tax rates were raised in 1981 and 1983,33 but their effectiveness in raising revenues was dampened by the recession and then-slow economic growth that affected Ireland and many of the developed economies at the time.
Nevertheless, tax revenue rose from less than 33 per cent of GDP in 1981 to over 36 per cent - a high watermark of modern Irish taxation burdens - in 1984.34
The public-sector borrowing requirement thus began to slowly recede in 1983, although it remained at a high level and so the ratio of public-sector tions that Irish development policy had sought to attract, but also by Government, financed in part by funds from the European Union Cohesion Fund and other structural funds to which Ireland had access owing to its relatively low GDP per capita compared with the EU average. On top of this, while the 19821984 consolidation occurred during a period of real appreciation of the exchange rate, the strong fiscal consolidation of 1987-1989 occurred in a period marked by a roughly 18 per cent real devaluation, as measured by relative unit wage costs in manufacturing, representing an improvement in competitiveness that stretched to an almost 40 per cent gain in this index of competitiveness between 1987 and 1996.36
There was also a limited growth of wage rates in this period, which reflected in part the high rate of unemployment; hut it was also very much the result of a sequence of "social compacts". These were, importantly, part and parcel of the fiscal packages. That is to say, since the preparations for the second fiscal consolidation,
Ireland has not had British - or United States-style industry - or plant-level collective bargaining. Instead, German-style consensus agreements were pursued that included multi-year national pay arrangements, as well as many of the components of the Government's tax and spending policy. Four agreements of this type were reached, beginning with the 1988 Programme for National Recovery. Each involved trade unions, employers, farmers, the Government and "social pillar" representatives such as the unemployed and religious orders.
In the years since these agreements were introduced in 1988, unit labour costs in the business sector have fallen in four years and, when positive, have never exceeded 4.3 per Cent.37 The first three agreements also limited publicsector pay increases and the salary component in budgets. Increasingly, the agreements have covered not only private- and public-sector pay increases, but also such aspects of fiscal policy as public-sector staffing levels, social welfare payments, tax reform, and so forth.
An example of the manner in which these agreements melded public- and private-sector incomes policy and fiscal policy can be seen in "Partnership 2000" (the programme for 1997-2000), which calls for, among other things, a 9.25 per cent national public- and private-sector real pay increase over 39 months, a further 2 per cent increase through local-level negotiations tied to restructuring and productivity, an extra 900 million punt in corporate and personal income tax cuts over three years, 525 million punt in additional social inclusion spending, 100 million punt in business tax refunds, a little over 100 million punt in additional farm relief and a target general government deficit of 1.5 per cent of GDP from 1997 to 1999 (well below the Maastricht criterion).
As in the previous programmes, the new agreement helped to shape the new budget debate.
Ireland's fiscal consolidation effort has thus spanned a period of some 15 years and has been maintained, if with lapses, by a range of Governments, including minority Governments, coalition Governments and even minority coalition Governments. A need to bring the debt/GDP ratio under control provided the initial impetus for reform. Membership in the European Union has also had several important influences on the consolidation process. The generally shared objective of meeting the Maastricht criteria has helped maintain the process in recent years. The broad range of constituencies represented in debt to GDP continued to climb (see figure VII.2). Deeper budget adjustments were clearly needed and they began in 1987 shortly after a new report reflecting the ongoing public debate - had called attention to the precarious nature of the debt-to-GDP ratio and called for a fiscal policy effort to reduce it. The public debt ratio peaked in 1987 at 116 per cent of GDP.
The new initiative cut current and capital expenditures, rather than seek balance mainly through tax increases. This notwithstanding, the tax base was widened, most notably through a tax amnesty which produced 497 million punt in 1988, some 6 per cent of total tax revenue. This brought tax revenue as a share of CDP to its peak level of over 37 per cent of GDP (in 1989 it was down to 34 per cent of GDP). The current budget spending cuts were largely composed of a public-sector pay freeze and control of public-sector staffing levels.
In the years since 1989, fiscal policy was made by a succession of coalition Governments which have maintained the broad direction of fiscal improvement.
A crucial difference between the 1987-1989 fiscal episode and the 19821984 experience lay in the performance of GDP. The initial consolidation exercise took place during the years after the second surge in oil prices, when the industrialized countries were combating inflationary pressures through tight monetary policies which, inter alia, raised real interest rates to high levels, after their having been negative in some cases in the late 1970s. In Ireland, the unemployment rate, which had been edging upward throughout the 1970s, more than doubled from 7.3 per cent in 1980 to 17 per cent, the peak rate, by 1986. GDP fell in that year, but then it grew over 4 per cent in 1987 and 1988 and by more than 6 per cent in 1989.
Despite the growth in GDP, Ireland experienced net declines in employment in 5 of the 10 years of the 1980s. High emigration rather than job creation was responsible for most of the decline in the unemployment rate seen in the late 1980s. However, sustained net job creation began in 1992 and has produced a considerable fall in the unemployment rate, to approximately 12 per cent in 1997, at a time when some other countries that are also candidates for joining the single currency area of the European Union were struggling with rising unemployment.
As Ireland is a very open economy, short-run changes in the growth of GDP are very much a function of international developments. The world economy was relatively buoyant during the period of the second Irish fiscal adjustment in terms of the growth of world output and trade, but there were also some particular developments that benefited Ireland. One was the break in international petroleum prices in 1986, which lowered Ireland's energy costs. A second was declining international interest rates. Long-term German interest rates, which had been over 10 per cent in 1981, declined to 5.8 per cent in 1987, while the Irish spread over German rates fell from 8 points in 1982 to under 1 point by 1991 (it has hovered under 2 points ever since). In addition, in 1986, as part of a general realignment in the Exchange Rate Mechanism of the European Union, Ireland devalued its currency 8 per cent against its main trading partners.
Thus, the fiscal contraction begun at the same time as a stimulus to demand was feeding through the economy from these other developments.
The external component of the demand stimulus came at a time when Ireland was becoming increasingly competitive internationally. This was a period of the maturing of large investments, in particular by transnational corpora the multi-year national labour and social agreements have produced a forum for discussion on how the burdens of adjustment should be divided. Finally, two further factors have contributed to the success of Ireland as a small open economy - substantial European Union resource transfers and the export boom reflecting the maturation of a long-standing industrial policy of attracting export-oriented foreign direct investment.

Tuberculosis has become a global health problem, but one that could easily be resolved if only there existed an international determination to resolve it. From an economic point of view this epidemic is about wasted lives and lost productivity, about the need to organize and finance the health sector efficiently to serve the needs of the population, and about the need to provide for equitable access to appropriate health services. The present chapter reviews the background of the tuberculosis epidemic, as well as its current stage, and then explains why the problem will not disappear by itself. It focuses on the economic and organizational issues of tuberculosis control and recommends new initiatives and strategies to supplement current work in the field.
Public-health programmes such as tuberculosis control can be of great benefit to society provided they are well conceived and well executed. If control of endemic disease is not regarded as a public good and treated accordingly, society at large suffers the negative consequences of private decisions that affect people across national boundaries.
Throughout this chapter, the term "tuberculosis" is used as a synonym for "pulmonary tuberculosis", which denotes the most prevalent type of tuberculosis by far.

Tuberculosis claims the lives of 2 million to 3 million people each year and accounts for about 4-5 per cent of deaths globally. Almost 90 million people are expected to contract the disease in the 1990s and, assuming no change in treatment coverage, 30 million will die (see figures VIII.1 and VIII.2). The vast majority of the victims (80 per cent) are in the economically productive age group 15-49. Poverty in itself does not cause tuberculosis, but there is a strong connection: 95 per cent of infected people live in and 98 per cent of deaths occur in low-income countries. South Asia registers the highest incidence of the disease, and tuberculosis is on the rise there owing to increasing numbers infected with human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (HIV/AIDS), and to the ineffectiveness of current programmes to combat tuberculosis.
Researchers in India recently studied the socio-economic status of patients with tuberculosis. They found tuberculosis to be most prevalent among the poorer strata of the population, although the better-off are not immune from the disease. Tuberculosis was also found to be more common among people in improvised dwellings in urban areas than among those who live in more substantial structures. The Indian survey found the highest incidence of tuberculosis among people with no schooling.1
Even though it is adults in the prime of life who are most affected by tuberculosis, children are not immune from the disease. Indeed, approximately 1.3 million cases and 450,000 deaths from tuberculosis are recorded each year in developing countries for children younger than 15 years of age. For children and young adults, the incidence of tuberculosis is similar for males and females; after the late twenties, it is higher in males. However, studies comparing passive case-finding (patients' presenting themselves to a health institution) with active case-finding (screening of the general public) reveal that with the passive approach tuberculosis is less apt to be detected in women by public authorities. A Nepalese study found that females made up 28 per cent of cases who referred themselves to a clinic whereas with active case-finding the percentage rose to 46 per cent. In addition, there is evidence that women of reproductive age progress faster from infection to disease than do men of the same age group.3
A small but vulnerable group of people - refugees and displaced persons calls for special attention. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in 1995 estimated the number of refugees to be more than 25 million people, in addition to a similar number of displaced people, and their numbers are steadily rising. Ninety-one per cent of the refugees and displaced persons live in developing countries of Africa, Asia and Latin America.
Tuberculosis is an important health problem and a leading cause of death among adults in refugee camps. The World Health Organization (WHO) recommends that tuberculosis should become a health priority once the emergency phase of a refugee situation is over.
In most countries of Eastern Europe and the former Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR), the incidence of tuberculosis was higher than in Western Europe in 1990-1992. Moreover, poor treatment or a complete lack of treatment in some of these countries has caused the rate of infection to climb still higher, as in Romania and Kazakstan. One of the obstacles to curing the disease is an insufficient and/or erratic drugsupply.4
The global problem of tuberculosis is immense when measured in terms of mortality and morbidity; consequently its socio-economic impact is significant.
In terms of social and economic burden, in the year 1990 tuberculosis ranked as the seventh most important disease in the world and the fifth most important in the developing world. A recent study projects that tuberculosis will retain this rank among leading diseases until the year 2020 (baseline scenario)."
Tuberculosis is caused by the bacillus Mycobacterium tuberculosis which in most cases attacks the lungs. Infection is typically transmitted from persons with pulmonary tuberculosis to other persons through coughing or sneezing.
Only about 5-10 per cent of those infected with the tuberculosis bacilli develop clinical disease. In 80 per cent of such cases, clinical tuberculosis develops within two to five years of infection. Half of infected adults who develop the disease are smear-positive patients (their sputa contain sufficient numbers of bacilli to be detected by microscopy); they are the source of infection in the community. In the absence of adequate treatment, an untreated smear-positive person might infect, on average, 10-15 persons per year.
Given that the source of infection is thus a smear-positive person, tuberculosis can be controlled with existing technology because the infectious agent resides almost exclusively in the infected person, who can be quickly rendered non-infectious. Nonetheless, inappropriate treatment of tuberculosis can lead to continued disease and to the development of drug-resistant tuberculosis.
Drug-resistance is not only a threat to the developing world but a worldwide problem whose global magnitude is not yet well appreciated." The highest rates of multi drug resistant tuberculosis (disease resistant to two of the most important anti-tuberculosis drugs in use) have been reported in Nepal (48 per cent);
Gujarat, India (34 per cent); New York City (30 per cent); Bolivia (IS per cent); and the Republic of Korea (14.5 per cent). Poor or suboptimal tuberculosis control programmes can lead to rapid emergence of drug resistance.
An infectious person who is drug-resistant infects others with bacilli that are also drug-resistant, thus starting a deadly chain. In developing countries, the problem is especially severe because most of the drug-resistant cases cannot be cured and alternative drugs are not affordable.
Tuberculosis has become a more pressing problem with the appearance of the HIV/AIDS epidemic. With HIV infection present, those infected with tuberculosis progress more quickly to the clinical disease stage, because their weak immune systems allow bacteria to develop unchecked. HIV results in: a Reactivation of latent tuberculosis with a high fatality rate; b New infection and rapid progress to active tuberculosis with high death rates; c Transmission of tuberculosis from dually (HIV and tuberculosis) infected individuals to the general population.
For these reasons the spread of HIV/AIDS is associated with an increase in the incidence of tuberculosis.
If a person without HIV in a developing country becomes ill with tuberculosis, he or she can be easily cured with effective treatment and can thus recover normal health. A person with HIV is 30 times more likely to develop tuberculosis than a person without HIV and, if left untreated, can expect to survive on average only five to six weeks. However, a person infected with both HIV and tuberculosis can be treated effectively for tuberculosis, gaining on average an additional two to three years of life.
The lethal connection between tuber~ulosis and HIV is reflected in the high incidence of tuberculosis in HIV-infected persons (40-54 per cent in subSaharan Africa). These figures vary according to the spread of HIV; in a number of sub-Saharan African countries such as Uganda and Zambia, tuberculosis is found in a large percentage of HIV-infected persons; this is not the case in countries such as India, which has a large population infected with tuberculosis but relatively few cases of HIV HIV infection is increasing in India, however, and this can be expected to increase the already high incidence of tuberculosis in the country. recent In the industrialized world, tuberculosis mortality has been declining since the beginning of this century. Improvements in socio-economic conditions and in hygiene, as well as the practice of isolating infectious cases in sanatoriums, have helped to contain the spread of the disease. The introduction of anti-tuberculosis drugs in 1954 gave hope that tuberculosis could be effectively controlled if not eradicated. Since then, a variety of chemotherapeutic agents have been developed. Today, WHO and the International Union against Tuberculosis and Lung Disease (IUATLD) recommend four drngs for multi-drug treatment.
In the case of tuberculosis, unlike that of other infectious diseases such as poliomyelitis and measles, there is no effective way to prevent its occurrence in adults. As a consequence, the only way to prevent new cases is to cure those already infected with tuberculosis. A vaccine does exist for infants and is widely used throughout the world, often as part of the Extended Programme on Immunization (EPI). It is the bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG) vaccine, which was developed in the beginning of this century. There is no consensus regarding the effectiveness of BCG, but most authorities grant that BCG is between 40 and 70 per cent effective in preventing tuberculosis in children from birth through age 14 when the vaccine is administered at birth. 3
The principle problems with the standard practices developed in the 1950s were that, first, the drugs had to be taken over a period of 12-18 months and, second, administration of the medicine was left in the hands of the individual patient. As a result, many patients dropped the treatment or failed to take their drugs regularly and thus became chronic cases. The patients treated ineffectively did not necessarily die from tuberculosis - in fact many enjoyed a long life; but the community lost because of an increase in the number of sources of tuberculosis infection.
The solution to this problem as perceived by experts was to develop a medically supervised shOlt-course form of chemotherapy. A field study of such a short-course cure was carried out in Africa in the 1980s, revealing a significant improvement in cure rates.
In the 1990s, the WHO strategy for fighting tuberculosis has been DOTS (directly observed treatment, short-course), a form of chemotherapy which lasts six months, and is supervised and monitored by health professionals. It is designed to overcome shortcomings of earlier treatments, such as low cure rates, high relapse rates, high fatality rates, and drug resistance. The essential features of DOTS are: a Placing of top-level political commitment behind a well-designed and managed programme in order to secure adequate and regular funding; b An uninterrupted supply of drugs reaching even the most remote health centre; c Staff training and education at all levels down to the front-line health worker; d Direct observation of the individual patient taking the tuberculosis drugs; e A health system that maintains a rigorous system of recording and reporting on patient progress in order to ensure that powerful anti-tuberculosis drugs are used properly.
The DOTS strategy makes the health system - not the patient - responsible for successful treatment and for verifying that a cure has been achieved. This is critical, as most tuberculosis patients start to feel better after just a few weeks of medication and are tempted to stop therapy.
If this strategy is followed, a patient with infectious pulmonary tuberculosis will cease to be infectious within two to six weeks. With the DOTS strategy, the health worker is supported by a central management unit that ensures that the programme is functioning and that the necessary infrastructure is in place. The targets suggested for achievement by those countries that adopt the DOTS strategy are a detection rate of 70 per cent and a cure rate of 85 per cent.
Although China is an excellent example of success achieved with this strategy (see box VIII. I), other countries with a high incidence of tuberculosis, such as India, still have a long way to go.
When patients take tuberculosis drugs it must be ensured that they take at least four effective drugs in the initial phase and two in the continuation phase.
To achieve success (high cure rates and a minimum of drug-resistance) with the DOTS strategy, some countries package all drugs in "combipacks". However, while this packaging does simplify the dispensing of medication and may increase compliance, the possibility remains that, as many pills must be taken, certain drugs may be selectively omitted. Fixed drug combinations minimize the opportunity for a patient, provider or programme to selectively reduce or eliminate one or two medications from the treatment regimen, and remove the risk of multi drug resistant tuberculosis if treatment is stopped for any reason.
According to WHO, DOTS achieves the greatest results in controlling tuberculosis where: a Incidence is high; b Population is large; c Non-DOTS is operating ineffectively; d DOTS coverage is currently low.
In India, all of these elements are present, and the country has much to gain from implementation of DOTS. It is estimated that 2.3 million people each year require treatment for tuberculosis in India, and that the cure rate is only 35 per cent.IO
An important part of the DOTS strategy is establishment of the necessary infrastructure (such as a supply of effective drugs) and appropriate education of health workers. It is not enough to make drugs available, although in some countries this is a major problem in itself; health workers must be able to understand how to restore a patient's health and how to achieve a cure. The expertise necessary to cure patients suffering from tuberculosis must be transferred to the level responsible for the first contact with the patient, and instructions must be provided to the patient in a way that is understandable to him or to her. .
Medical practitioners have for many years been able to treat tuberculosis with considerable success, and short-course chemotherapy combined with other elements in the DOTS strategy has improved the effectiveness of this treatment. Improved cure rates should lead to a global reduction in the number of persons with tuberculosis. The epidemic, however, has not ceased; on the During the cultural revolution (1965-1976), tuberculosis control was not a health priority , in China. In the early 1980s, a National Tuberculosis Programme (NTP) was re-established. I Some progress was made, but after financial reforms were implemented in 1982, the costs of tuberculosis treatment became the responsibility of the patient or his insurer, thus making treatment dependent on the ability to pay. As a consequence, some provinces experienced stagnation or increases in the prevalence of the disease. Despite considerable progress, tuberculosis thus remained an important health problem in China: 6 million people were estimated to have active pulmonary tuberculosis; the disease was the most important single cause of premature mortality, with an average of 360,000 deaths each year.
Against this background, China and the World Bank reached an agreement for implementation of a national tuberculosis control programme in selected provinces during the period 1992-1998. The programme encompassed two goals: (a) to immediately increase cure rates, and reduce transmission through an effective programme of control; and (b) to improve the
services to implement future disease control programmes and to By March of 1996, the following results had been achieved: 
a nearly half the population of China - 
b Cure plus treatment completion rates were 94 per cent for new cases and 90 per cent for re-treatment, compared with a cure rate of only 52 per cent reported for the whole country in 1980. The main features of the programme that account for its success have involved: 
a Instituting a vertical organization that integrates a strengthened central tuberculosis 
b and township levels; 
c Adopting the principle of passive case detection, through which health workers detect new cases of tuberculosis among those who present themselves with other than actively search for new cases by rand
d Screening cases by fluoroscopy because the expertise for this method was already available; . 
e Adopting the WHO strategy of DOTS (directly observed treatment, short-course), with the village doctor as supervisor of the initial phase of therapy; f Restructuring the organization and finance of public-health services in support of principles a-e." contrary, the number of persons infected with tuberculosis is expected to increase to 10 million cases and lead to 3 million deaths in the year 2000 if radical changes in treatment are not introduced. There are a number of reasons for this; in order of importance, they are: a Inadequate tuberculosis programmes, leaving patients without a cure; b Increase in the number of cases of HIV which fosters the spread of tuberculosis; c Deterioration of public-health services in a number of countries.
In a number of developing countries, inadequate tuberculosis programmes fail to cure patients either because they provide no relevant treatment at all (owing, for example, to a lack of drugs) or because they provide the wrong treatment. A study in Bombay has shown that private practitioners who treat tuberculosis in that city use 80 different drugs, only 4 of which are effective against tuberculosis when used in the prescribed combination.!!
In 1990, 4 percent of all tuberculosis cases, equal to 0.3 million people, were attributable to HIV infection. By the year 2000, this proportion is expected to increase to 14 per cent of all tuberculosis cases. The Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) estimates the number of persons living with HIV/AIDS at the end of 1996 to have been 22.6 million, 14 million of whom were in sub-Saharan Africa (see figure VIII.3). The incidence of HIV is increasing, especially in Asia, which has the highest proportion of tuberculosis cases. India alone is expected to have 250,000 new HIV-related tuberculosis cases each year by the year 2000. HIV will thus be an increasingly important factor in the spread of tuberculosis.
Industrialized countries have assumed for years that tuberculosis is not a major health issue and does not constitute a threat to their population. This, however, is no longer entirely true. It is now clear, especially in the United States of America, that health authorities must take drug-resistant tuberculosis seriously. In the former Soviet Union and in some countries of Central and Eastern Europe, economic decline has had a profound impact on national health services, including treatment of tuberculosis. The general deterioration of the health-care system has allowed tuberculosis to become an epidemic once again.
In developing countries, the problem of drug delivery has been debated for years and provides the main rationale for vertical health programmes whose sole objective is to secure and distribute essential drugs. Countries and parts of countries still exist where drug delivery is erratic and hampers the return to a healthy life for many people, including those infected with tuberculosis. Few developing countries have a well-functioning national tuberculosis programme to support the primary health system by ensuring a supply of drugs, diagnostic equipment, trained staff, and recording and reporting systems. Some countries have introduced user charges for drugs in an attempt to recover costs. If the poor are not exempted (or the tuberculosis drug packages are not delivered to them free of charge), they do not have effective access to tuberculosis treatment.
The strong connection between poverty and tuberculosis means that this is of great concern from both an equity and a public-health point of view.
Obstacles to control of tuberculosis are many, especially because of the connection between tuberculosis and HIY. Effective drugs that can cure tuberculosis patients have been available for decades, but the world is only now beginning to implement a second wave of technology, namely the DOTS strategy, to overcome obstacles to effective treatment and halt the spread of this disease.
In both industrialized and developing countries, the first step towards a solution to this epidemic is to realize the magnitude of the problem and then to mobilize decision makers who are able to give it high priority. Commitment of health service workers is not enough. Commitment is also required by decision makers who control the budget, for com:mitment without allocation of funds cannot produce the desired results.
More research is needed to provide policy makers with the information required for informed decisions regarding, for example, the preferences of patients and what causes them to interupt treatment. A short-course treatment lasts six months but provides considerable relief in a few weeks; it may be the case, however, that a poor peasant is concerned with obtaining not a cure but rather only enough relief to allow him to become productively employed once again.
It is a generally accepted fact that even in poor countries it is essential that health services include treatment of tuberculosis. However, health systems are not always perfect. Political will to address the problem by giving it priority, for example by adopting the DOTS strategy, and to allocate the necessary resources is a prerequisite of ending the epidemic. A number of countries have adopted or are beginning to adopt the WHO strategy of DOTS. If others follow in their wake and the strategy achieves high cure rates, the epidemic might eventually be stopped.
A common obstacle preventing successful implementation of tuberculosis programmes is the overall organization and finance of health services. Health services are the responsibility of government in each individual country, and they are vital to the support of tuberculosis control programmes. If problems of the organization, finance and delivery of health services are not dealt with in an appropriate manner, a tuberculosis programme might fail. Problems that may have to be considered include user charges for tuberculosis drugs, long travel distances to an appropriate health facility, and lack of cooperation or regulation of the private sector.
The Revised National Tuberculosis Control Programme adopted by India in 1992 is intended to last 8-12 years. To improve detection and treatment of the disease, the Programme takes into account private physicians, who perform an important role in the care of tuberculosis patients. In India, there is a long tradition of tuberculosis-infectious patients' going first to a private clinic rather than to a government health centre. Unfortunately, however, private providers in India do not keep records, nor do they monitor the progress and outcomes of their patients. It has been estimated that tuberculosis patients in India today spend more than $100 million per year on tuberculosis care, but this buys them at most relief rather than a cure. If the Revised National Tuberculosis Control Programme of India is to succeed, the behaviour and practices of private, for-profit physicians must be changed. Effective incentive measures implemented to make it profitable for private physicians to cure patients rather than alleviate symptoms.
In the public sector, the commitment of a well-trained staff is necessary in order for a tuberculosis programme to succeed. Regardless of whether the tuberculosis control programme is carried out solely by the public sector or as a public/private mix, commitment on the part of civil servants is essential.
Incentives are useful in securing a high quality of services in the public sector.
Public-health workers can be paid bonuses for number of cured patients and for low-drug resistance; but unless such incentives are based on reliable data and regular reviews, they will not be effective.
Decentralization of public-health services and allocation of financial responsibility to local Governments can result in serious problems for a supervisory system such as a national tuberculosis control programme. Brazil, for example, has experienced severe difficulties with its programme because of decentralization (see box VIII.2). Health programmes are vulnerable to changes in organization and finance; what appears to be an efficient, costreducing innovation may, in practice, turn out to have undesired and severe side effects.
Economists view health care as a combination of goods and services that the patient acting as a consumer considers desirable insofar as he or she expects the consumption of these goods and services to contribute to improved health and quality of life. For this reason the consumer/patient is willing to sacrifice what is often a large portion of the family budget in order to obtain health care.13
Health care differs from most consumer expenditure, however. It has three attributes that call for special attention from a policy point of view: a Uncertainty regarding incidence of illness; b External effects in consumption; c Asymmetry between provider and user in respect of information.
Anyone of these is the basis of a valid argument for government intervention and perhaps for introduction of public health care to replace or supplement private care. The rationale for public health care is that market failure in health-care services has large negative consequences for society if government does not intervene.14
The future health of any individual is uncertain. Consequently, a person cannot predict when he or she is going to need health care. Demand for health care is uncertain and therefore the expenditures required for health care are also uncertain. An institutional response to uncertainty is the introduction of some form of insurance, either public insurance financed by taxes or private insurance financed by premiums. If the poor cannot afford to pay the premiums Between 1970 and 1990, the morbidity and mortality of tuberculosis decreased in Brazil.
The deterioration of the tuberculosis programme that began in 1990, combined with the spread of HIV/AIDS, now threatens to reverse this downward trend. The decentralization of services to the municipality level started in 1988. The idea behind the reorganization was to bring general health care closer to the patients. This did not happen. Tuberculosis control for the most part was left out of the decentralization process, and few municipalities provided tUbe~cu~~;~:~~~~~~: ~;~~~~~I~:~:~:~~ea~~~~~i~rT~o;o t~~~~r~~I~~~; are described below: :i~~:r~::!:;~~:;}~=;::::::::::::::llev'lwere u.nable re adl~st d Some municipalities demonstrated a limited ability to take on new responsibilities; e The fact that public funds were allocated to municipalities in proportion to health.
The fact that many patients chose emergency outpatient services as their first contact with medical services contributed to poor case detection. to insure the availability of health care when required, there is then a case to be made for some sort of government subsidy or intervention.
Consumption of health Care may have positive effects on the well-being of others. Every member of society has an interest in controlling an infectious disease like tuberculosis: when my friend is healthy (free of tuberculosis), the probability that I myself might contract tuberculosis is much smaller than when my friend is infected. In such a situation, private market mechanisms of resource allocation fail in the sense that they lead to under consumption of the service in question. There is no market in which those affected by the primary consumer's consumption can register their preferences. Actions that promote health for one individual and at the same time create positive effects for others, as is the case with control of contagious diseases, are referred to Pnalities.
These externalities result in market failure.
Health is not an ordinary commodity, even though good health is indispensable for enjoyment of life. The consumer/patient desires good health, but it takes a clinical expert to judge the need for health care. Because of this asymmetry between provider and consumer in respect of information, consumers can be exploited by sellers of health care, including sellers of tuberculosis treatments. In India, for example, private clinics submit tuberculosis patients undergoing chemotherapy to weekly X-rays, an unnecessary practice that adds to the cost of treatment.15 Market failure of this type is common in the healthcare industry and leads to an inefficient use of resources.
The market for health care has other characteristics as well that justify government action. Many parties bear the costs of an epidemic like tuberculosis: the state treasury because of lost tax revenue due to the illness and early death of a person in the prime of life, health services that are forced to divert resources from other activities (such as prevention of HIV) to the diagnosis and treatment of tuberculosis, and - not least - the patient undergoing treatment and his or her family who suffer loss of income and might be in debt for years in the absence of adequate insurance (public or private). costs The costs of tuberculosis fall into three groups: a Direct costs of treatment: i To the health services; ii To the patient and his family (for example, payment for drugs and transportation); b Non-treatment costs to society/communitylfamily; c Intangible costs (pain, suffering, grief).
It is important to consider all three types of costs in estimates of the total cost of tuberculosis to society. All too often decision makers consider only costs to the health system, neglecting the costs borne by the patient and his family. For this reason they find it difficult to comprehend that a patient might voluntarily stop treatment.
Tuberculosis imposes high costs on society in part because the disease disproportionately affects people in their productive adult years. Many of those infected are heads of households and/or parents. Furthermore, tuberculosis decreases the (already short) life expectancy of HIV infected persons. The number of disability-adjusted life years (DALYs) lost in 1990 in developing countries because of tuberculosis is estimated to have been 37.9 million for adults. 16 The number of tuberculosis cases has increased since then, so the present toll may well be on the order of 40 million adult DALYs each year.
Tuberculosis ranks as the fifth most important cause of lost DALYs in developing countries, and the seventh most important cause for the world as a whole.
The harm to relatives that results when the head of a family becomes ill with tuberculosis is clearly demonstrated in the case of India where tuberculosis is the second most important cause of death among adults. When a husband becomes ill from tuberculosis, his wife cares for him and often accompanies him in his search for health care and treatment. She might be forced to enter the labour market in order to replace some of the lost household income, although full-time work is generally not possible. Time spent on earning income comes at a sacrifice of household activities such as childcare. In addition, women are known to become infected during their husband's disease. If the wife fails to earn enough income herself, the loss of income formerly earned by the head of the family can lead to malnutrition and morbidity among the children. Older children may also have to go to work: for example, it is common for poor families in India to supplement household income with the proceeds of child labour. In rural areas, many elderly family members are often severely affected as well, depending on their ability to generate income, when the breadwinner of the family becomes ill.
The magnitude of this indirect cost has been estimated in Thailand to be two months of lost income, on average, for each diagnosed and treated patient.
In contrast, patients who are never diagnosed or treated lose, on average, a full year of work. This estimate does not include, however, the time that patients sp\end in many countries shopping around among providers before they are finally diagnosed. The figures from Thailand should therefore be regarded as a minimum estimate of lost income for treated patients.
The direct costs to health services (private or public) are the costs involved in diagnosing, treating and controlling tuberculosis. In each individual country, these costs vary according to the services provided, the prices of the services involved, and the organization of health care (economics of scale, capacity, cost-recovery schemes). However, the total costs to health care are to a certain degree dependent on the effectiveness of tuberculosis services: the detection rate and the cure rate. The greater the number of infected persons who are detected and cured, the smaller will be both the number who require re-treatment and the number who transmit the infection to other members of society.
The direct costs of tuberculosis to the health system have been calculated in a number of studies for various countries over the last 10 years. Focusing solely on the provider costs involved in carrying out short-course chemotherapy at a cure rate between 70 and 90 per cent, these vary in today's prices from
$100 to $150 per patient cured. An older study from the 1980s of Malawi,
Mozambique and the United Republic of Tanzania reports calculations of $82$ 1l1 per patient cured. 20 The costs included by the researchers are sputum examination, drugs, stationery, health education, supervision, initial examination of outpatients and follow-up.
The direct costs borne by patients are more difficult to deduce from the present literature, and vary depending on user charges and distance to the nearest health centre. User charges for drugs, outpatient services and even diagnostic services and hospital stays have been introduced in order to finance health services.
In the case of India's private clinics, out-of-pocket costs borne by patients for diagnosis and successful treatment average an estimated $100-$150, more than half the annual income of a daily wage labourer. 21 There has been an extensive debate on the need to protect the poor from user charges, because even small charges might have an undesired impact on their consumption of drugs and other health services. In the case of tuberculosis, which is very infectious, society has a great interest in controlling the disease and making sure that groups in society are not discouraged from seeking a,cure. The cost of travel may also discourage patients from seeking treatment. For those who live in isolated regions, compared with patients who live in towns with convenient access to health centres, travel adds substantially to their cost of treatment.
To establish the cost-effectiveness of tuberculosis treatment, it is important to clarify one's measure of outcome. An intermediate measure such ascompliance is not optimal, and a measure such as patients treated does not make sense in the case of tuberculosis unless the cure rate is established. The outcome measure should preferably be the number of persons cured. On the cost side, all costs - socio-economic costs as well as the cost of treatment - to providers and patients should be calculated. The preferred measure of costeffectiveness is cost per patient cured, or marginal cost per patient cured if the programme is altered, for example by extending its life or by changing the mix of drugs.
The cost-effectiveness of tuberculosis treatment is relatively high: $3 $7 per DALY gained. Very few health-care interventions are so efficient. The main reason for such a high rate of cost-effectiveness is the fact that an infectious person infects, on average, approximately 15 persons a year, each of whom infect another 15 persons a year, and so forth.
HIV-infected persons are a group at high risk for developing tuberculosis.
WHO and IUATLD have issued therapy guidelines that recommend thatHIVinfected persons who have not received BCG and have had a positive tuberculin test, but in whose case active tuberculosis has been excluded, should receive preventive chemotherapy (isoniazid) for 6-12 months. Since preventive chemotherapy increases life expectancy by approximately two to five years, the regime provides value for money and assures that the HIV-infected person does not die from tuberculosis. In contrast, a non-HIV-positive person who is treated for tuberculosis gains approximately 25-30 years of life from the treatment.
In resource~poor countries, the use of chemotherapy cannot be justified if its use takes away resources from treatment of active cases of tuberculosis.
In many countries at the present time, national tuberculosis programmes will not be able to follow this guideline.22
The resource constraint for health care in many developing countries forces Governments to choose between efficiency and equity. HIV-infected persons are already an extremely vulnerable group, and other (more expensive) drugs that can prolong life and increase their quality of life is available today only for HIV/AIDS patients in iKldustrialized countries. If policy makers in developing countries - including multilateral and bilateral agencies - want to contribute to the welfare of HIV-infected persons, it is feasible for them to promote use of preventive chemotherapy as a secondary preventive tool. First, however, this must be made a priority either on equity grounds or because the community wants to protect itself from the spread of tuberculosis.

Tuberculosis is today a major health problem that challenges the health services of many countries. As regards developing countries, tuberculosis is spreading rapidly in sub-Saharan Africa in the wake of the HIV epidemic as well as in Asia where it has been a substantial problem in itself for years. In economies in transition, tuberculosis is on the rise following the deterioration of public-health services that has accompanied the contraction of the economy.
Globally, the world faces drug-resistant strains of tuberculosis for which there is no known cure or for which there exist only very expensive cures.
In Asia, China has made rapid progress in tuberculosis control during the last five years, but India, which has 30 per cent of all tuberculosis cases of the world, has still a long way to go. The projected increases in the number of HIV-infected persons in the next decade in this part of the world makes prospects for the immediate future bleak indeed. Some countries in Latin America have managed to cope well with tuberculosis control over the last few decades, but others in that region have been less successful. Sub-Saharan Africa has been hit severely by the HIV/AIDS epidemic; the lethal combination of a weak immune system and tuberculosis has become a fact of life for hundreds of thousands of people in that part of the world.
The saddest part of this tale is that the epidemic did not have to arise. The four-drug treatment for curing the disease at its source - in the person infected - has been available since the 1970s, and has been proved effective in a number of countries. The world community could thus ask why it allowed this problem to reach epidemic proportions.
In countries affected by the epidemic, economic growth that improves the lot of the poor will help the situation. A decrease in the spread of HIV will also contribute positively to the fight against tuberculosis. Each of these events can occur, however, only in the medium term. In the meantime, Governments must recognize the magnitude of the problem and give it the priority it deserves.
There are budgetary implications - this cannot be escaped - but they entail warranted expenditures that will be supported by an informed public. Part of what is involved is strengthening national systems by training health workers and by reorganizing and providing appropriate finance for their health systems.
Fundamental reforms are necessary if a tuberculosis control programme is to reach its targets. In China, this was achieved by providing diagnosis and treatment free of charge, by introducing incentive payments to the (private) village doctors for referral of patients and supervision of chemotherapy, and by inducing local Governments to fund the fixed costs of the dispensaries~3 The example of China shows that it is feasible for Governments to work with private doctors, provided they set in place appropriate incentives. The lesson is not that a country cannot decentralize its health services, but rather that the central level must take on a supervisory and monitoring role in support ofdecentralization.
Successful tuberculosis control also requires that national and local Governments open health systems to all citizens and that medical doctors and other health workers become convinced of the need to ensure that the patients take their medication. In the final analysis, however, responsibility for success or failure rests on the shoulders of the patient. Further research is needed to determine why some patients fail to complete the treatment, even when the DOTS strategy is implemented, thus exposing themselves and others to drugresistant tuberculosis.
The medical treatment recommended today has existed for many years, but the DOTS strategy was not developed by WHO until the 1990s. The concept of an entire set of prerequisites, including emphasis on a short-course (six-month) form of chemotherapy that has been proved cost-effective, is appealing. However, the DOTS strategy requires adequate and regular funding, which is not always forthcoming. China offers an excellent example of respect for existing institutions while building on them to reach new targets; but it must be emphasized that local Governments in China were ready and willing to cover the costs of diagnosis and treatment of tuberculosis patients. Countries that have less accessible health systems, or impose user charges on the poor, will find it difficult if not impossible to reach cure rates of 90 per cent or more.
Investment in health-care systems, such as a tuberculosis programme, requires years to produce noticeable results. Building infrastructure such as a hospital or a clinic is immediately visible to voters, even if, ultimately, the benefits to the community are less than those of a programme, to fight tuberculosis, which has a large outreach component.
Donor Governments generally prefer to target assistance on countries that are relatively small and relatively poor; but a survey carried out in 1990 showed that there is no clear relationship between external assistance to health sectors per capita and gross national product (GNP) per capita or between assistance per capita and measures of health needs. In particular, if burden of disease or cost per DALY gained is taken account of by donors, this is not reflected in the allocation of resources to tuberculosis programmes. 24
In other words, donors might review their priorities and consider whether the current allocation of funds is socially efficient. It is also important that the donors coordinate their actions, especially in the many developing countries undergoing structural adjustment programmes and facing increasing fiscal constraints on their health services.
The DOTS strategy underscores the role that political will plays in successful implementation of a tuberculosis control programme. To make the DOTS strategy a success, more attention also needs to be paid to the organization and finance of the health-care system within which the tuberculosis programme is going to operate. If this occurs, it will be possible to extend DOTS to those who are not served today and, in∑' the longer run, to improve the DOTS strategy itself. The DOTS strategy must be combined with organization and financing in a given country to make it possible to reach targets for tuberculosis control.
The increasing importance of HIV infection and tuberculosis calls for research into the cost-effectiveness and sustainability of alternative methods of tuberculosis control in areas of high HIV prevalence. Such studies could cover preventive therapy for HIV patients with tuberculosis, as, well as coordination of tuberculosis and HIV control activities, including home-based care and alternative methods of implementing DOTS.25
Tuberculosis control requires government intervention precisely because it creates huge externalities, that is to say, large benefits going to persons other than the patient. Governments can intervene in many ways; They can distribute drugs free of charge, or subsidize drugs for the poorest citizens. They can ensure that public clinics are within the reach of everyone, or provide incentives for private clinics to carry out this role.
In the case of tuberculosis, the only way to prevent the disease from spreading is to cure those who are already infected. The cure is available, the strategy to implement it has improved markedly in the 1990s, and it has proved to be cost-effective. This epidemic, along with the pain and suffering that it is causing, can be stopped if Governments choose to stop it.
With the end of the cold war, there were widespread expectations of a "peace dividend" in the form of military resources being freed for economic and, particularly, social development. According to a broad interpretation of the term, there has been a wide-ranging dividend in the enhanced degree of peace and security in the world, with correspondingly wide-ranging indirect economic benefits, for example as a result of increased interaction between the former primary adversaries.
However, according to the narrower interpretation of the term which was usually applied, the allocation of the peace dividend has been difficult to identify. The evidence does not suggest that any significant proportion of the resources formerly used for military purposes were directly or implicitly reallocated to development or, specifically, to enhancement of social welfare. In many countries, those resources were largely used in the process of fiscal consolidation where the benefits were more diffuse and less directly observable than if there had been direct transfers of purchasing power.1 In those cases where the discontinuation of military production and other activities resulted in unemployment, the consequence tended to be social costs rather than benefits. One response was to try to undertal!:.e "conversion" from military to civilian activities.2 In view of the limitations on conversion, there was frequently domestic pressure to f"md external markets to substitute for the loss of domestic demand. With arms producers seeking markets for both their current production and existing stocks, the result was a "buyers' market" in the international arms trade.
Economic motivations, while always present, have therefore become more visible and have contributed to a new regional pattern in the international arms trade. They have also contributed to the emergence of new arrangements for the financing and international production of arms. At the same time, the first half of the 1990s saw a proliferation of low-level national conflicts, separate from superpower rivalry and mostly in countries that have limited capabilities to produce their own armaments. Trade in arms was necessary to sustain these conflicts and remains an important element of the overall threat to global peace and security. The present chapter reviews these developments in the international arms trade since the end of the cold war and examines the forces that are driving it now that the international political situation has changed.
The value of the global arms trade peaked in the period 1984-1987, at an average annual value in 1994 dollars of$75.7 billion. The fall-off has been sharp, to an average annual value in 1991-1994 of $29.7 billion, also measured in 1994 dollars.3 (See box IX.l for a discussion of data sources and issues.) While the high levels of military procurement and international arms sales of the mid-1980s were probably not sustainable, the end of the cold war removed a major political motivation behind the supply of armaments and led to a much sharper decline in global sales than would otherwise have been the case. In addition, the post-cold war world has seen a reduced demand for military goods and services, as procurement budgets fell among members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and the former Warsaw Treaty Organization (WTO), and in many other countries.
The decline in the value of international arms sales is coincident with, but far greater in relative terms than, the decline in worldwide military spending since the mid-1980s (figure IX.l). In the 1980s, the member countries of NATO and WTO dominated arms exports, and the decline in sales from those countries in the 1990s is the major factor behind the overall decline in international arms sales. The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics was a major supplier of arms prior to 1991, but its successor States playa much smaller role as exporters in the 1990s, to a significant extent because the other former WTO members have become far less important as arms importers. Many sales by the Soviet Union were subsidized, and newly privatized military production firms have encountered difficulty in competing in international arms markets. However,
Russian firms have aggressively sought markets in recent years. The Russian Federation ranked first among countries in the value of arms transfer agreements entered into in 1995.4 This may signal substantial growth in the value of Russian arms exports in the future. The United States of America is by far the largest exporting country, having accounted for almost half of arms exports in 1991-1994 (table IX.l).
The United States is the only country capable of exporting a full range of weaponry and equipment, and is considered to be a first-tier producer.s Other countries, including, for example, China, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the Russian Federation, Sweden and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, have the technical capability but not at present the quantity or quality of production facilities to rival the United States in export markets.
These countries produce a narrower range of weapons and equipment, and are considered second-tier producers. Third-tier countries produce a significant quantity of weapons but with less technical sophistication than first- or secondc tier producers; and their production is often derived from designs originating with first- or second-tier producers. Such countries, including Australia,
Brazil, Egypt, Israel, the Republic of Korea, Singapore and South Africa, have on occasion been able to sell in first- or second-tier country markets. More commonly, they sell to fourth-tier countries and other third-tier countries. In recent years, there has also been an increase in collaborative arrangements among third-tier countries. Fourth-tier countries produce unsophisticated weapons in minimal amounts and are not a factor on export markets.
Countries in the Middle East have been major arms importers since the 1970s, and continue to be so in the 1990s. Arms transfers to the Middle East grew following the 1991 Gulf war, in part to replace equipment and weapons used or destroyed during that conflict. In 1991-1994, Saudi Arabia was by far the world's largest importer of military goods and services. On the other hand,
Iraq, a major weapons importer in the 1980s, was required to withdraw from the market in the 1990s as the result of United Nations enforced sanctions.
The other region where arms imports have shown some growth is East Asia." In both areas, regional security concerns have combined with substantial financial resources to provide a stimulus for arms purchases. East Asian countries in particular have utilized a portion of their growing incomes to become significant importers of arms and equipment.7 A number of developing countries in this region have sought to use arms purchases, subcontracts and productionsharing arrangements as a means of obtaining technology and developing domestic industries that would eventually be capable of entering global aerospace markets as suppliers.
Purchases in Latin America and the Caribbean have been low, but as countries in that region recover from the 1980s debt crisis their capacity for increased arms imports will begin to rise. That both North Africa and subSaharan Africa have become far less important as arms importers is to a significant extent the result of the ongoing economic difficulties of most countries in those regions. In addition, the cessation of hostilities in Angola and Mozambique, and the establishment of a democratic post-apartheid Government in South Africa, have eliminated several sources of demand for armaments from Southern Africa. tries and countries that were members of neither alliance.1o Disagreements remain over which products to restrict, and conflicts with manufacturers are likely as the latter pursue export markets. Individual countries continlle their policies on export limitations but with mixed success.11
The rising importance of dual-use goods reflects the growing sophistication, and in many cases the declining real costs, of civilian goods and technology. In the years after the Second World War, many war-related technological developments were "spun-off' into goods for civilian markets. For example, research on computers and applications of computer technology received substantial support from military research and development and military purchases in the United States and the United Kingdom.12 Jet aircraft and radar also emerged from Second World War military programmes. Production engineers at Toyota credited United States aircraft production systems in the Second World War with providing a model for the just-in-time inventory system that became an essential element of Japan's lean production systems.13
Now, in many countries, "spin-on" has become important.14 High development costs, long lead times and relatively small markets for military goods and services, combined with demands from military end-users for constant technical improvements, have contributed to rapid unit-cost growth for many military products. Thus, the growing technical sophistication and declining costs of many civilian products and processes have made them more attractive for use in military products. Some analysts have explicitly argued that Governments should foster the development of dual-use technologies and products in order to cross-fertilize both military and civilian industries.1s In Japan, the Government has long fostered dual-use strategies on the part of firms.16 The leading Japanese military production firms are also leaders in civilian manufacturing and high-technology industries and have engaged in extensive cross-fertilization between civilian and military activities. France has also supported both civilian and military applications of technology but in different firms. Present moves by France towards privatization and rationalization in military production may increase the overlap between military and civilian producers. In the United States, spin-off from military to civilian industries was important after the Second World War, but military production and civilian production have become increasingly separate since that time.
Trade "offsets" occur when the supplying company agrees, as a condition of a weapon sale, to purchase goods and services in the importing country. Offsets can also include a commitment to subcontract part of the weapon system production in the importing country. Increasingly, they include purchases of goods and services not connected with the weapon or equipment being sold, and even purchases of purely civilian goods and services. These arrangements are forms of "counter-trade", a practice that is intended to offset all or part of the foreign exchange cost of imports with equivalent foreign exchange earnings. Such arrangements have traditionally been sought when the importing country either has limited access to foreign credit (for example, as the result of a foreign debt overhang) or puts a premium on increasing exports (for example, when exporters are facing difficulties of their own).
The changing global political balance has also been reflected in changes in the types of weapons being traded. Larger weapons systems, including, for example, combat aircraft, fighting ships and tanks, are being traded in far lower numbers (table IX.2). There has been some shift towards the upgrading of older systems involving purchases of components and technological know-how. Such sales, however, can be difficult to track. There has also been some growth in sales of lower-intensity armaments, often those more suited for domestic conflicts and police activities.s In addition, non-State actors such as insurgency movements and paramilitary organizations have become relatively more important as buyers, although' it is extremely difficult to obtain accurate and timely information on such activities. Partly as a result of the growth of non-State buyers, black markets in weapons appear to have grown in importance.9

Two decades ago, the international arms trade could largely be characterized as involving government-to-government arrangements for the transfer of weapons and equipment in return for cash payments, sometimes financed by aid or low-interest credits advanced by the supplying Government. Producing companies would work with Governments in arranging sales and deliveries.
Over time, however, a variety of arrangements have developed that have increased the complexity of the arms trade and generated additional channels for the transfer of both weapons and military technology.
The existence of products and industrial processes that have both civilian and military applications, either directly or with accessible modifications, presents a difficult problem in regard to both the analysis of arms transfers and the formulation of policies and norms for the control of military transfers.
Examples of dual-use goods and services are vehicles, including aircraft and ships, that can serve as troop and supply carriers, radar systems,. computers and machine tools. Some avionics systems can be used on both military and civilian aircraft. Another area of concern is the possible overlap between civilian research in nuclear energy and in chemical and biological processes, and the development of instruments of nuclear, chemical and biological warfare.
The trade in dual-use products leads to an undercounting of the value of arms. exports. The classification of an export as military is determined by the nature of the buying entity. If a dual-use product is purchased by a civilian agency and later transferred to a military organization, it will likely be counted as a civilian export. Similarly, computer chips purchased by a manufacturer of civilian goods and then used in the manufacture of military equipment would not be considered a military export.
During the cold war, the NATO countries attempted to control the export of dual-use goods to WTO members. This led to a number of controversies as civilian technologies became more sophisticated and civilian goods, such as personal computers and machine tools, were denied export licences to WTO member countries. Recent attempts to establish a wider export control regime for militarily sensitive dual-use goods have included NATO countries, former WTO counThe growth of offsets was originally a reflection of competition among sellers.
Military industries are traditionally characterized by excess capacity. Military production firms have high fixed costs, especially in research and development.
However, limited procurement budgets make it difficult for firms to generate enough domestic sales to spread their fixed costs in a manner that would allow prices to fall. This provides a powerful incentive for firms to seek export markets and has been a stimulant to government policies promoting military exports. A number of Governments have aggressively sought export markets for their military output, both to generate revenue and to reduce the unit costs of their own weaponry.
In addition, new technological developments often do not replace existing capacity, but lead to the creation of new capacity as domestic political pressures constrain the ability of Governments to shut down production lines.
This may be changing as the decline in the size of the market is forcing some consolidation, although substantial excess capacity remains. In the 1990s, the enhanced power of buyers in a shrinking market, as well as (when subcontracting is involved) the growing production capabilities in many buying countries, has further stimulated the granting of offsets.
To meet their offset commitments, arms sellers have acted as brokers and involved other companies in purchasing in the importing country. In such instances, the value of offsets has on occasion exceeded 100 per cent of the value of the arms sale. Offsets make it more difficult to justify an arms sale on the basis of the economic stimulation that it provides to the exporting country's arms industries and, via multiplier effects, to local and regional economies.
On the other hand, offset agreements are not always easy to enforce. In certifying offsets, it is not always clear whether a particular purchase is new or if it constitutes a diversion or reclassification of one that would have occurred in any event. For this reason and others, offset commitments are often not fully met or enforced.
Offset agreements often include subcontracting and co-production arrangements.
In recent years, a wide variety of international collaboration agreements have become more common, and represent an important aspect of the growing internationalization of military production (see figure IX.2).21 Subcontracting and licensing have been important in the past, with both the United States and the former Soviet Union being major participants. In the 1990s, licensees were largely third-tier developing-country producers. Co-production arrangements involve firms from more than one country producing a weapon originally produced in one country. During the cold war years, co-production arrangements had strong political overtones, as countries used co-production as a means of ensuring weapons commonality and sharing economic benefits among allies.
Co-development, an extension of co-production, involves pooling development resources and activities on a new project. Various long-term collaborative relationships are also being used including joint ventures and other risk-sharing arrangements. The large development costs, small markets and long production runs characteristic of weapons production induce companies to seek collaborators in order to pool risks. The growth of collaborative arrangements among military finns largely follows the expansion of similar arrangements among civilian producers in such areas as electronics and airframe and engine manufacturing. 22
Government policies playa large role in shaping collaborative agreements among military producers. In a number of instances, Governments have negotiated collaborative agreements with leading arms producers as a means of obtaining access to advanced product technologies and production know-how for the purpose of stimulating their own industrial development. In Japan, collaborative arrangements with both military and civilian aircraft manufacturers from the United States are part of this strategy, which is consistent with Japan's emphasis on developing dual-use technologies. Japanese firms are major subcontractors to Boeing on civilian airliners and are co-producing, with McDonnel Douglas, the F-15 for the Japanese Air Force. In addition, Japan is developing a new fighter aircraft, originally known as the FSX and now called the F2, in a major technology-sharing agreement with the United States.23
Asian developing countries have also looked towards international collaboration as a means of stimulating domestic military industries. The Republic of Korea, for example, is co-producing the United States-developed F-16 fighter aircraft, and hopes to use the knowledge gained to create a domestic aircraft industry.24 China has developed several weapon systems based on designs obtained from the former Soviet Union.25
These efforts have met with mixed success. Japanese firms have become internationally recognized producers of some military components, and are playing important and growing roles as subcontractors in civilian airliner construction.
However, despite a decades-long effort to develop a domestic aircraft industry and with numerous achievements in other high-technology activities,
Japanese firms are still not able to compete internationally in either civilian or military aircraft production.26 This is partly due to the difficulties involved in catching up in an industry where technological standards are rapidly advancing.
The ability to integrate a wide range of rapidly changing technologies into a single product is difficult to achieve, and helps explain why these product lines tend to be dominated by a small number of firms. Nonetheless, the growth of offsets and collaborative arrangements offers evidence of important changes in the arms market. The fact that arms sales are increasingly accompanied by transfers of technology tends to result in a spreading of the ability to produce weapons among a larger number of countries. This has led to a paradoxical situation where the substantial decline in global arms sales has been accompanied by a proliferation of the ability to produce weapons and equipment.

The international arms trade is unlikely to reach cold war levels in the foreseeable future, but there are indications that it might expand in coming years.
The largest uncertainty involves political relations and national perceptions of security needs. Flare-ups in conflict situations and deteriorations and setbacks in situations where tensions have been reduced would likely stimulate an increase in arms transfers. Regional arms races are also possible, for example where domestic resource availability allows some countries to make significant arms purchases and where countries feel that their security is threatened.
With respect to the major weapons-producing and -supplying countries, there is likely to be an increase in the development of new systems to replace the present range of weaponry based on older technology. In the United States, for example, three combat aircraft are in development as potential replacements for 1970s-era systems. In addition, a heightened emphasis on information based offensive and defensive systems is stimulating the development of technologies to upgrade existing systems and generate new ones. 28 New weapons development can intensify pressures to export as firms and Governments seek to spread development costs. Indeed, export potential is usually included in the projecting of programme output and unit costs. This involves identifying potential buyers, assessing their needs and providing them with information on system specifications during research and development. Even as new systems are brought into production, older production facilities are sometimes kept open for the purpose of generating output for export.
In some countries, the downturn in military spending has stimulated some rationalization in military production. For example, in the United States, a boom in mergers and acquisitions has reduced the number of major weapons producers and led to the closing of some capacity, although substantial overcapacity remains. 29 It is not clear, however, whether a more concentrated industry will be more successful in containing development costs. A needed consolidation among defence producers in Western Europe has yet to occur, although some Governments have taken steps in that direction, Russian military production firms are beginning to emerge from that country's restructuring, and in the absence of strong growth in domestic civilian and military markets these firms are likely to be aggressive exporters.
The existence of significant conversion potential would reduce the pressures to increase exports. While Governments may be capable of taking more effective measures to reduce capacity and control costs, the lack of success in converting to civilian production leaves many military firms with little choice but to seek export markets or substantially reduce their scale of operations.
Conversely, growing numbers of firms in developing countries are acquiring the capability to compete in world military markets, especially in electronics, communications and sub-component manufacturing. The emerging emphasis on information systems will expand the demand for the upgrading and retrofitting of existing weapons platforms, and such firms are poised to gain a significant share of that business. In these situations, the transfer of technology and business skills from civilian activities is making the firms concerned more effective competitors in certain military markets.
The decline in the volume of international trade in arms has been partially offset by a broadening of the market, in terms of both the range of products involved and the number of countries participating as either importers or exporters. The transfer of technology, either directly or through trade in dualuse goods, has reinforced the proliferation of arms-making capabilities. This increased globalization of trade in sophisticated, if not the most advanced, weaponry increases the possibility that armed conflict will arise in politically tense situations. While significantly reduced in magnitude, the present pattern of the international arms trade nevertheless poses a continuing threat to world peace and security.
A prominent theme in writings about international economic relations over the past. decade has been the increased integration of the world economy. Some analysts have highlighted the closer linking of the world's financial markets, the trillion-dollar-a-day foreign exchange market and the greater ability of some "emerging market" economies to tap the vast pool of foreign financing. Others have focused on the greater role that traded goods and services play in economies as barriers to trade fall and as transnational corporations diversify their production locations and markets. The present chapter outlines developments in another sector of international trade, namely international travel. It is a sector that has grown rapidly, pushed by rising discretionary incomes, falling real costs and more rapid communication and transportation, and one that is of considerable economic importance to some countries.
International travel is a unique category of international trade.
Instead of the exchange of a good between residents of two countries, international travel requires the physical presence of a resident of one country in a second country. Travellers arrive in the foreign country for any of several reasons. Their stay is temporary, however, and generally short. The goods and services they consume while in the host country make up, in essence, the category of trade designated "travel" for statistical purposes (see box X.I). This chapter looks at developments in international travel as portrayed by these recorded data. However the value of travel itself - tourist travel inparticular - seems to be far in excess of these recorded expenditures, especially if account is taken of the greater appreciation of foreign peoples and cultures that it engenders. o During the past quarter century, international travel receipts grew by an average of 12.5 per cent per annum in current dollars (see table X.l'), significantly faster than the corresponding figure of 9.7 per cent for world output. In many countries, the travel industry is increasingly recognized as a strategic sector for earning foreign exchange, diversifying the export base, generating employment and reducing regional imbalances.
In 1996, international travel receipts reached $389.4 billion,2 of which the developed economies accounted for about three quarters and the developing economies for most of the remaining amount (table X.l). This exceeded the estimated value of total world oil exports ($330 billion ~ in the same year. The world tourism industry is estimated to have generated a total revenue of $3.6 trillion, equivalent to 10.7 per cent of world output, and employed 255 million people worldwide in 1996. 4
Except for slight setbacks in the early 1980s and in 1993, world travel receipts sustained uninterrupted growth during the period 1970-1995. Both the developed and the developing economies exhibited broadly similar trends in international travel receipts during this period (see figure X.l), though the average rate of growth in the developing economies was about 1.5 percentage points higher than in the developed economies. 5 After a mild dip in the early 1980s, the travel receipts of the developed economies grew rapidly in the second half of the 1980s in response to the prolonged expansion of world economy and a sharp fall in real air fares. In the first half of the 1990s, however, the growth rates for the developed economies decelerated significantly and exhibited large annual fluctuations. This slowdown was more pronounced than in the developing economies, reflecting not only the cyclical downturn and the effects of the Gulf war in 1991 but also the workings of so-called ceiling effects (such as the limit to paid annual leave entitlements) and the shift of tourists to more competitive destinations in developing and transition economies.
Travel receipts in transition economies in Eastern Europe exhibited large fluctuations and divergent trends, partially reflecting political uncertainties.
Since the beginning of this decade, travel receipts in a number of transition economies, in contrast with the developed and the developing economies, exhibited a strong upturn. According to the statistics of the World Tourism Organization,6 overall travel receipts in Central and Eastern Europe grew 31 per cent per annum during the period 1990-1994. As restrictions on border crossings are reduced, tourists from developed economies are increasingly lured by many attractions in these countries which are largely new to them.
These countries have competitive advantages in low prices, proximity to European developed economies, historical heritages, and ethnic ties with many developed economies. They are emerging as major competitive destinations by developing these niche markets.
Among developed economies, travel receipts in Australia and New Zealand grew most rapidly, with an average annual growth of 16.8 per cent and 17.9 per cent, respectively, during the period 1970-1995. They benefited most from a dramatic surge in tourist outflows from Japan and booming Asian economies. By 1995, their travel receipts exceeded 10 per cent of their merchandise exports. In the case of Australia, travel exports exceeded its largest commodity export Anempiricq]examinationofinternationqltravelissubjectto the availability, the quality and the comparability ofthe data.Shortc0rTlingsinconcepts and data methodologies, differences amongoriginaInationaLspurcesandotherproblemsstemming from the. pecul iar nature of international. travel itself can .introduce inconsistencies in data interpretation.
In this chapter,th~ dataare derived from two major sources: the International Monetary Fund (IMF) Balance of Payments Statistics. Yearbook for international travel receipts and expenditures and the World Tourism Organization (WTOl Yearbook of Tourism Statistics for international tourist arrivals. The IMF definition and data are used predominantly because they cover more countries in terms of expenditure va[ue.IMFdefinesinternationa[trave[.lers as..individualsINhO stayJor less than one year ina country where they are n0tr~sidents.
Trave[ expenditure covers all goods and services persona[ly used by travellers duringtheir stay in a foreign country. [t excludes international transport expenditure. Travel is divided into two categories: business and personal. a Personaltrave[inc[udesholidays,recreational and cu[tural activities, visits to relatives and friends, pilgrimages and religious observances, and education and health-related travel.
This IMF concept is broadly equivalent to the concept of an international visitor in the WTO recommendation except for the following: a WTO excludes seasonalb and border workers; b WTO excludes students and medical patients going abroad. for more than one year; c WTG includes. the transport expenditures paid to resident carriers bynon-residentvisitors andto non-resident carriers by resident visitors. This inconsistency has been addressed by separating passenger transportation from international tourism receipts in the wmstatistics.
Even when the international definitions are used, thecomparabi[ity,the accuracy and the completeness of data depend on.the specific methodo[ogiesused.in data collection. In collecting value data, three methods are used.. The most common one is based on bank reports on foreign currency transactions (classified by purpose). Some transactions, however, are not captured in the bank reports and not all the reported transactions are necessarily for travel spending in the reporting country. Data from this method are much less re[iable where there is no effective system of foreign exchange control. Asecond method involves sample surveys oftravellers atborder crossings and is used bya fewcountries,This method gives more detai.ledandreliable data but is.ï cost[y.ï.ï Th.e.th. irdm.ethod isacom.bination o.f the firsttWo.Very few countries use this method. ." ïïï. . <> < .ï.ï...ïïïï.ïï.ï.ï.. ' ïïï.ï..ï.
Methods used in col.lecting data on international tourist arrivalsalsovary INidely across countries. Statisticsareco[lected through border immigration controls, detailed periodic sur∑ veys or registration at place of accommodation. Mostcountries col.lect data on touristarrivals at the frontier. As regional integration progresses (as.inthe case of the. European Union), the data becomes increasingly unre[iable and survey methods are expected to be more widely used. Data from accommodation registration .invo[ve adegree of uncertainty due to underreporting.
In addition, there are inaccuracies as aresult of visitors' moving amongaccommodations in the same country and unreported visitors' staying in non-commercial accommodations.
The coverage can also differ among countries because of thewide range of goods and services that travellers consume. Changes in exchange rates can affectthevalue data because they are reported in United States do[lars. In some developing and transition econornies where there are foreign exchange controls, expenditures tendto be underreported.
The existence of an underground tourist economy and multi-country package tours are also sources ofdata uncertainty.
Thus, even though the same definition is used, there can be varying degrees of discrepancy among reported data by individual countries and the data may not be comparable in a strict sense. Sizeable bilateral discrepancies are not uncommon. Sometimes the bilateral discrepancy can be as large as 50 per cent. C However, the globa[ inconsistency between credits and debits in international travel is much smaller than in other components of the invisible trade account.
The global discrepancy for travel was $23.6 billion in 1995, equivalentto 6,1 per cent of world totaltravel receipts. This compares with 24 per cent and 10.5 per centfortransportationand income, respectively, both of which are major cornponentsofthe inVisible tradeaccount. d Despite reservations about concepts and data methodology, the published figures appear to indicate broad trends and can be used to analyse changing patterns over time, since the methodology has not changed. items, metal ore and wool, in 1995. The United States of America, Iceland and Malta also exhibited markedly higher growth in travel receipts than the average developed economies during this period, while Canada and most other developed economies with strong currencies experienced below-average growth.
Most of the growth in the travel receipts of the developing economies came from China, Eastern and Southern Asia, and Western Asia. There were large variations in performance among individual developing countries, with growth ranging from 1 per cent per annum in Gabon to 31.4 per cent per annum in Indonesia between 1970 and 1995. In general, three groups of developing economies tended to exhibit high growth: countries that had good natural tourism resources and pursued active tourism policies; countries that had gone through rapid industrialization and liberalized their economies; and countries that had generated large flows of migrant workers and emigrants in the recent past.
Some dynamic economies in Asia recorded 20-30 per cent growth per annum in travel receipts in the second half of the 1980s. Travel within the region was stimulated by rapidly growing income, freer intraregional travel, increased leisure time and dynamic trade and investment. The availability of low-cost group tours and government promotion measures (such as encouraging investment in tourism and the launching of "visit years") were also important factors. In the case of China, travel receipts increased more than 10-fold during the period 1980-1995. It became the second largest earner (after Hong Kong) among developing economies in 1995. The combined earnings of these two economies was $18.3 billion, about the same as the earnings of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
Travel receipts in many developing economies, except for a number of the well-established favourite locations, are small relative to their potential, with many of the possibilities offered by natural beauty and rich heritage left untapped. Development of tourism in these economies has been constrained by inadequate accommodations and poor transportation.
In a number of transition economies, such as the Russian Federation, the Czech Republic and Slovakia, growth in travel receipts, albeit from a low base, was particularly spectacular at 35-50 per cent per annum in the first half of this decade. Others, particularly those where some political uncertainty prevailed, such as Bulgaria and Romania, exhibited large fluctuations. By 1994, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland and the Russian Federation were among the 50 largest earners in the world. In 1980, none of these countries had been on this list. The combined receipts of these four countries was $10.7 billion in 1994, less than the $13.1 billion of Austria, while the number of tourist arrivals in Hungary alone was 21.4 million, larger than the 17.9 million in Austria.Virtually all of these countries suffer from inadequate accommodation and infrastructure as a result of decades of low investment in tourist facilities.
This is one of the factors that explains their low average receipts per tourist. In 1994, this figure was $66.7 for Hungary, compared with $735.4 for Austria.
Joint ventures with large foreign chains are increasingly perceived as a major instrument for eliminating bottlenecks in good-quality accommodations and services, but the adoption of the necessary regulatory environment has been slow. In some countries, however, private participation in tourism industries has progressed to a significant extent.
Reflecting their slower growth than the world average, the developed economies' global share of travel receipts has declined 6 percentage points during the last 25 years, while that of the developing economies has risen by a comparable amoune (see figure X.2). Thirteen out of the 20 top tourism "exporters" in the world were developed economies in 1994 (see table X.2).
The United States was the largest, earning $69.8 billion in 1995. Its global share almost doubled from 12 per cent in 1970 to 19.3 per cent in 1995 owing mainly to the incentive provided by the depreciation of the dollar against other major currencies. Its share was more than twice that of the next largest tourism exporter, France. The majority of other developed economies, particularly Austria,
Denmark, Finland, Germany, Ireland, the Netherlands and Switzerland, lost global shares. The higher relative cost in these countries caused travellers to shift to more competitive destinations.
About three quarters of the international tourists in the developed economies in 1994 were from within that group of countries. Except for Japan, where inflows from the developed economies accounted for only about 35 per cent of total arrivals, developed regions received more than 60 per cent of their tourists from developed economies. Within Western Europe, more than three quarters of tourists were received from within the region, with the share ranging from 66 per cent in the United Kingdom to 97 per cent in Portugal in 1994.
Tourist arrivals were relatively more concentrated in countries along the Mediterranean coast, reflecting the flows of sunlust travellers from NOlihern European countries. The share of arrivals in Europe from the United States fell significantly in the past decade while that from Japan rose. The share of arrivals from some Eastern European economies in Europe has been increasing rapidly in recent years, albeit from a low base.
Large tourism resources and well-developed accommodations and infrastructures, the establishment of the European Union, the opening of the Channel Tu,nnel, the expansion of high-speed rail networks, the construction of large theme parks and the increasing tendency of travellers to take short-break holidays were conducive to sustaining intraregional flows in Western Europe.
The developed economies were also the main source of tourist expenditures, accounting for 81 per cent of the world total in 1995. Sixteen of the top 20 spenders in the world were developed economies: Germany overtook the United States and became the largest spender with expenditure of $50.8 billion in 1995, accounting for 15.8 per cent of the world total (compared with 14.3 per cent in 1970). The United States share declined from 22 per cent in 1970 to 14 per cent in 1995. Japan, the United Kingdom, France and Italy were the next largest spenders. These six countries accounted for more than half the total world international tourism expenditures. Among these six, Japan's share rose most spectacularly from 1.7 per cent in 1970 to 11 per cent in 1995. In dollar terms, its travel expenditure surged more than fivefold in the second half of the 1980s, mainly because of the appreciation of the yen and encouragement by the Government (particularly through its "10 million programme"3), as well as the reduced work week. By 1994, it was the third largest spender in the world, up from sixth place in 1980, and its travel deficit offset 18.9 per cent of its surplus in merchandise trade.
Most of the share of global travel receipts lost by the developed economies was taken by the developing economies and virtually all of that was assumed by Eastern and Southern Asia. This region accounted for about half of the total travel receipts in the developing economies by 1995. In 1994, out of the 12 developing economies that were among the world's top 30 destinations, 9 were from this region.s Africa and Latin America and the Caribbean, on the other hand, lost global shares substantially. Their combined earnings were $28 billion in 1995, less than half the earnings ($69.8 billion) of the United States.
The significance of travel receipts in export earnings and national income steadily increased in both developed and developing economies during the period 1970-1995 (see tables X.3 and X.4). Both ratios have remained somewhat higher in the developing economies than in the developed economies. In more than 30 developing economies and 10 developed economies, travel receipts were equivalent to more than 10 per cent of the value of exports of goods in 1994. In many of these countries, tourism had become the largest export item.
Among developed economies, the ratio of travel receipts to exports of goods in 1994 ranged from 1 per cent in Japan to 70 per cent in Greece. While the ratio was above 20 per cent in Austria, Greece, Malta, Portugal and Spain, it was below 5 per cent in Canada, Finland, Germany, Japan, the Netherlands and Sweden. The ratio of travel receipts to gross national product (GNP) varied from 0.1 per cent in Japan to 24 per cent in Malta.lO
The variation in these ratios among developing economies was much larger, mainly reflecting the uneven distribution of tourist resources, different stages of development and differences in development strategies. In some island economies (such as Barbados, Cyprus and Seychelles), travel receipts were two to three times the value of merchandise exports in 1994, while in Bangladesh, the Congo, Gabon, Ghana, Kuwait and Nigeria, they were less than 1 per cent.
In Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic, Egypt, Fiji, the Gambia, Haiti, Jamaica, Malta, Mauritius, Morocco, Nepal, Paraguay, Senegal, Tunisia, Turkey and Uruguay, the share was above 20 per cent. The share of travel receipts in GNP also ranged widely - from 0.1 per cent in Gabon to 31 per cent in Barbados.
In most developing economies where the ratio of travel receipts to exports of goods was high, travel receipts were the largest contributor to foreign exchange earnings, exceeding the value of those countries' traditional staple exports.
Several developing countries now have a relatively well-developed tourist sector which, except for most island economies, has established fairly strong vertical linkages with the domestic economy. Low-cost labour and an abundance of natural and cultural attractions were dominant factors attracting tourists. In the Caribbean and North Africa, geographical proximity to developed countries was an advantage. In some, distant island countries, the importance of travel receipts increased significantly as low-cost air transportation became available.
Government promotion efforts were also crucial.
Apart from a slight surplus in 1993 (as a result of a surge in the surpluses of Italy and the United States), the travel account balance of the developed economies as a group has been in deficit since 1986, while that of the developing economies has been consistently in surplus since 1970. The total travel deficit of the developed economies widened to $6.7 billion in 1995, attributable mainly to deficits of $34.5 billion in Germany and $33:5 billion in Japan.
The travel deficits of these economies widened rapidly after the value of their currencies appreciated as a result of the Plaza Agreement in 1985. More than half the developed economies, however, experienced a travel account surplus in 1995. For Australia, Austria, Greece, Portugal, Spain and the Unites States, which are mostly in sunbelt areas, a persisting sizeable surplus on the travel account has offset a significant part of the chronic deficits in their merchandise trade. In the case of Spain, a travel surplus of $21 billion more than offset its merchandise trade deficit of $17.7 billion in 1995. Its large domestic tourism resources not only attracted foreign travellers but also kept outbound travel at a low level.
The travel account surplus of the developing economies as a whole increased steadily from $0.9 billion in 1970 to $34.6 billion in 1995, equivalent to 64 per cent of their total current account deficit in absolute value. This surplus almost doubled in the second half of the 1980s, owing mainly to a sharp increase in the surplus in Eastern and Southern Asia and Africa. For individual countries, these travel balances ranged from a deficit of $4.4 billion for Taiwan Province of China to a surplus of $4.3 billion for China in 1995.
China, Cyprus, the Dominican Republic, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Mexico, Singapore, Thailand, Tunisia and Turkey recorded surpluses of more than $1 billion in 1994, while Argentina, Brazil, the Republic of Korea, Taiwan Province of China and Venezuela incurred deficits of more than $1 billion.
About two thirds of 79 selected developing economies had a surplus on their travel account. A shift from a deficit of $20 million in 1992 to a surplus of $3.0 billion in 1995 in Mexico and a steadily widening surplus from $0.7 billion in 1982 to $5 billion in 1995 in China were notable.

The rapid growth and increasing diversity of international travel during the last quarter century have been the result of complex interplays among a host of socio-economic, demographic, environmental, technological and institutional factors. These factors have had profound influences on all phases of the travel industry. They have changed the basis for competitiveness and affected the patterns of international travel expenditures.
Reflecting the heterogeneity of travellers with their different motives, a diversity of factors are involved in shaping the demand for international travel.
Those engaged in leisure travel (holidaymakers) constitute the dominant group in both the developed and the developing economies and thus factors associated with this component playa predominant role. According to World Tourism Organization statistics, leisure travel was the purpose of 67.5 per cent of world travellers in 1993. Those engaged in business travel and those engaged in other-purpose travel, including visits to relatives and friends, represented much smaller but still significant proportions of world travellers with shares of 17.2 per cent and 15.3 per cent, respectively. The boundaries among these components, however, are often unclear, as travellers frequently seek to achieve more than one purpose in a given trip, combining, for example, business travel with pleasure travel.
While the globalization of businesses has stimulated international travel flows, the rapid expansion of travel demand has been driven mainly by growing income, the declining real cost of travel and increasing leisure time. The relaxation of restrictions on foreign travel and government and private promotion efforts have also stimulated travel. Increased travel flows have been further facilitated by the spread of low-cost package tours. Other factors, such as immigration and migration of workers, political disturbances, economictroubles and bad publicity (such as diseases and attacks on tourists), have also affected travel flows.
Among these demand-side factors, income and the cost of travel are the most crucial. International tourism is a luxury consumption item in the consumer basket and is thus income elastic. This is reflected in the significantly higher pace of tourism growth compared with GNP growth that was noted above. The proportion of discretionary income spent on travel tends to increase as income rises until a saturation level is reached. This positive relationship is also borne out in the broadly parallel cyclical movements of income and tourism demand. However, the responsiveness of tourism to cycles of income has been somewhat asymmetric, insofar as tourism is more responsive to upturns than to downturns, owing mainly to structural factors such as social benefits and globalization. The relationship to income is also reflected in the dominant share of high-income economies in global tourism expenditures.
Passenger fares are another important determinant of demand. In particular, the sharp fall in real air fares has made long-haul travel affordable and played a critical role in the expansion of international tourist flows in recent decades.
The cost of travel is also affected by changes in exchange rates and inflation.
Exchange-rate fluctuations, together with income and political disturbances, are the most important factors explaining short-term variations in tourism demand at the country level.
Increasing leisure time, resulting from the reduction of working hours and the steady extension of legally constituted holidays, has also supported the sustained growth of demand for travel. In the developed economies, the length of paid vacations ranges from two weeks in the United States to seven weeks in the Netherlands and this difference affects the duration of travel significantly.
In the recent past, however, the attitude towards this entitlement has changed and the benefit has stopped increasing in most developed economies. This upper limit on leave entitlements has begun to be a constraining factor in respect of the growth of travel demand in a number of these countries.
The reductions in many countries of various restrictions on citizens wishing to travel abroad and on visiting tourists have also been important conducive factors for the rapid growth of international travel. In the case of the Republic of Korea, for example, the relaxation of restrictions on foreign travel caused outbound travel to surge by 30 per cent per annum in the second half of the 1980s. The recent integration of the transition economies into the world market has also led to a sharp increase of travel flows to a number of these countries in Eastern Europe and South-East Asia.
In parts of the world where regional integration has been progressing, there have been rapid increases in intraregional travel. In particular, flows of intraregional short-break holidaymakers, migrant workers and business travellers have been facilitated. In Europe, the Schengen Agreement signed in 1985 and the Schengen Convention concluded in 1990 reduced border controls to only spot checks between France, Germany and the Benelux countries and provided a basis for the free movement of travellers.
Despite such progress, there remain various barriers to the movement of persons in many countries. The main ones are direct administrative control on entry and exit, such as visa requirements, passports and exit permits, and indirect controls, such as restrictions on foreign currency allowances and other laws and regulations which, although directed mainly towards immigration and the migration of workers, also affect travel. If the reduction of these barriers continues, it could unleash a tremendous amount of latent tourism demand in an increasing number of developing and transition economies.
Changing consumer preferences, in response to demographic changes and growing concerns about sociocultural and environmental conditions, have been increasingly affecting the nature of tourism demand in the developed economies.
In particular, the ageing of baby boomers (those born shortly after the end of the Second World War) and their greater life expectancy have led to an increase in the pool of potential travellers. As the baby boomers became adults, their presence as a social group has been increasingly felt in the global tourism market.
They are wealthier, more sophisticated and better informed than their predecessors and demand more variety, better quality, greater flexibility and more individualism in their holidaymaking. As a result, particularly in developed economies, there is occurring a slow shift from standardized mass tourism based on the conventional desire for "sun, sea and sand" to more flexible and differentiated forms based on a broader spectrum of ingredients, including culture, heritage, entertainment, nature, sports, learning, health and other special interests.
The demand for these new tourism products has been rising rapidly.
The spread of low-cost mass tourism based on scale economies and standardization has facilitated the strong expansion in international tourism by enabling people at lower income levels to travel abroad. Although the growth of new forms of tourism recently began to outpace the rigidly packaged tours in developed economies, conventional mass tourism will continue to be the main vehicle of holidaymaking for awhile, particularly in developing and transition economies.
Restrictions on trade and foreign investment constrain business travel indirectly.
Recently, stimulated by the globalization of business activities, business travel, including such conference services as trade fairs, exhibitions and seminars, has been rising rapidly. This, in general, is a more sophisticated, higherpriced and higher quality segment of international travel. Countries with large foreign trade and investment tend to generate and receive relatively greater numbers of business travellers. Within Europe, France, Italy and the United Kingdom are major destinations of business travellers. Business travel has also increased significantly in the past decade in emerging developing economies where foreign trade and investment have expanded rapidly.
In countries with former colonial and continuing cultural ties or large flows of migrant workers, immigrants and refugees, a large proportion of foreign travel involves visiting friends or relatives, as is the case for travel between France and her former colonies in Africa and Asia, travel between Germany and Turkey and Portugal, and travel between the United States and Viet Nam. More recently, large immigration and "guest worker" flows from some Asian countries to Australia, Canada, New Zealand and oil exporting countries in Western Asia resulted in a surge in travel by relatives on these routes.
Problems of water pollution, solid and liquid waste, damage to the ecosystem, contamination of the traditional culture, crowding and increasing crime and disease in highly frequented locations have caused a growth in people's awareness of limits to the social and environmental capacity. This increasing concern has led to the emergence of new, environmentally conscious tourism and has caused a shift in demand towards new, less crowded and cleaner beaches and mountains and other special-interest tourism. This is reflected in the rapidly rising ecotourism, cultural tourism and agrotourism in an increasing number of countries. For example, Brazil and Costa Rica, which are endowed with rich biodiversity and beautiful natural scenery, have successfully developed ecotourism to avert further environmental degradation and at the same time diversify foreign currency earnings away from coffee, bananas and cattle farming.
The factors that determine the supply of international travel are many and complex, as travellers consume a variety of goods and services. The important ones are non-reproducible natural and cultural tourism resources (such as mountains, beaches, rainforest, hot springs, climatic conditions and cultural heritage), accommodation and infrastructure, human resources and technologies. These factors not only determine the supply capacity to meet the demand but also form the basis for the competitiveness and specialization of individual countries.
The traditional natural and cultural resources are the prime factors that attract tourists. These resources are mostly immobile and give an advantage to countries with an abundance of them. Quite a few developing economies in the Caribbean, North Africa and parts of Asia and the Pacific that do not possess other export alternatives or face dwindling exports of primary commodities, have successfully developed competitive tourism industries by taking advantage of their natural tourism resources and low wage labour. In the case of Malaysia, international tourism was promoted as a more durable alternative in the context of export diversification; by 1995, receipts exceeded the country's traditional exports, palm oil and crude petroleum.
The supply of tourism services crucially depends on the capacity and quality of accommodation, infrastructure and other tourist facilities. Transportation is particularly critical for international travel. All these facilities require large sums of capital.
Developed economies in general have well-established infrastructures.
Some of these facilities (such as transportation networks) meet other needs, not only tourism-related ones. At the same time, the high demand for tourism within their domestic markets encourages the establishment of facilities dedicated exclusively to this activity. Nevertheless, quite a few developed economies, especially those with a high density of travellers, experience congestion in airports and road transportation networks during peak seasons and need to continue their efforts to alleviate these bottlenecks.
In most developing economies, the tourism industry is constrained by inadequate accommodations and infrastructures. Such countries lack the capital necessary to invest in these areas. Particularly in Africa, South Asia and Western Asia, direct air links to major sources of tourism demand are often not available and road networks are also poor, reflecting the lower level of development of the economy as a whole. In a number of dynamic economies in Eastern and Southern Asia, where the infrastructure is more developed, rapidly rising travel flows have, as in the developed economies, put strains on their capacities.
In many developing and transition economies, receipts per tourist are low owing to inadequate hotels and their weak bargaining position as against large foreign package tour operators,13 This low unit revenue adversely affects their ability to finance the required upgrading of facilities. In several developing economies, however, large multinational hotel chains have played an important role in tourism development and marketing. Through their superior management know-how, high-quality services and established global distribution networks, they can help maintain a higher level of tourist inflows. By facilitating the transfer of capital, technology, skills and management know-how, they also can help create the local endogenous capacity for a high-quality tourism industry.
Advances in transportation and information technologies, in particular the invention of jet aircraft and the introduction of the computerized reservation system (CRS), have brought about revolutionary changes in the international travel industry and reduced travel costs. These advances have facilitated the surge in mass tourism and have led to a profound transformation of virtually the entire tourism industry, from production through management and distribution to consumption.
The introduction of wide-bodied jet aircraft, such as the Boeing 747 in the 1970s, reduced long-haul travel time by 40 per cent, raised transportation capacities and reduced long-haul real air fares substantially. Nowadays, almost any destination in the world is within the reach of travellers at an affordable cost and within a reasonable time. Lower real air fares and increased carrying capacity were key contributing factors that supported the prolonged rapid growth of long-haul international travel. The spreading ownership of the private car and the introduction of high-speed rail networks have contributed to the rise in shorter-haul passenger travel.
The deregulation of the airline market and the introduction of large chartered aircraft also made a major contribution to the fall in real air fares in the 1980s. Since the Airline Deregulation Act allowing free price competition was passed in the United States in 1978, many countries have begun to deregulate their airline industries; this has included privatizing them and allowing foreign ownership and promoting competition. Privatization is being pursued in more than 40 countries. Since the carriers of the United States and other countries that have deregulated the industry have reciprocity-based traffic rights to other regulated countries, a two-level price system has emerged, which has resulted in a de facto overall price decline for scheduled traffic. Chartered carriers operating in non-scheduled traffic markets within a liberal environment also account for a substantial portion of the world market and have contributed to the falling cost of transportation. Competition has also forced scheduled carriers to lower their fares close to the level charged by charterers.
The travel industry has been increasingly able to capitalize on information technology at a time when travel options have burgeoned.14 The main impact of information technology has been on the distribution and marketing segments of tourism. Among the many applications of information technology in the tourism industry, the CRS is by far the most important. Since its introduction as an internal airline automation instrument in 1964, the CRS has evolved into an extensive travel information system covering the distribution of airline services, hotel reservations, car rentals, tours, entertainment and financial services.
This process has been intensified since United States airline deregulation in 1978. Such technology provides a basis for the flexible production of new, differentiated products, customized to changing consumer preferences, that are cost-competitive with standardized mass tourism. It also enables providers of tourism services to integrate their operation across the entire range of related industries,15 not only horizontally and vertically but also diagonally, 16 and to benefit from scale economies as well as scope economies17 and system gains. Most developed economies with an advanced scientific and technological base, particularly in the transportation and the information sector, have an advantage in this regard.
One study shows that a CRS reduced the cost of a booking from $7.50 to $0.50 and raised a travel agency's productivity by 42 per cent.16 The CRS has now become a major factor for competitiveness. It provides flexible itineraries and, since the late 1970s, has spread rapidly. By the early 1990s, more than 90 per cent of the travel agents in the United States were linked to a CRS. Carriers in other countries chose either to develop their own systems through regional consortia or to establish strategic alliances with systems from the United States.
The government plays a crucial role in the development of the tourism industry. In particular, many developing economies have made deliberate efforts to develop the tourism industry as a strategic sector for earning foreign exchange and broadening the export base. To this end, they have taken such measures as improving air transport connections to tourism-generating countries, developing new products, liberalizing the foreign exchange regime, devaluing their currencies, charging attractive tariffs for accommodations and privatizing the tourism sector. To overcome the shortage of investment funds, they have provided incentives to attract foreign investment and have encouraged joint ventures.
In the context of intensifying regional integration efforts, Governments have also been trying to eliminate restrictions on intraregional travel, deregulate transportation industries and harmonize laws, regulations and policies.
Increasingly, they cooperate in pooling regional tourism resources, producing more attractive joint tourism products, developing regional infrastructures, protecting the regional environment and promoting their tourism products.
Through cooperation, they can also enhance their bargaining power against major airlines and tour companies, accomplish more balanced regional economic development and promote regional sociocultural exchanges.
Globalization Globalization and regional integration facilitate flows of persons directly or indirectly. On the demand side, the reduction of restrictions on the movement of persons and the reforms in the regulatory environment promote freer travel and thus widen the travel market. On the supply side, they contribute to the enhancement of the productivity and competitiveness of the tourism industry byintroducing foreign competition and facilitating access to external factors of production, such as foreign capital, information technology, modern airline networks, management know-how and skilled labour. The impact, however, will differ among countries, depending on their stage of development, economic structure and regulatory environment. Because barriers in this industry are high and differences among countries are large, the liberalization of international travel offers large potential gains.
The freer movement of business and the intensification of competition as a result of globalization tend to concentrate control in the hands of a small number of large multinational hotel chains. There is some danger that these highly competitive large hotel chains will dominate local hotels which are, in general, small; less organized and in an inferior position in terms of capital, management know-how and marketing. In countries like France, Italy and the United Kingdom, where the tourism industry is based on a large number of small operations, 19 the impact of globalization can be large. Most locally owned hotels in developing countries are in a similar situation. For survival, small firms seek strategic alliances with large chains, mainly through franchising and management agreements, or specialize in niche markets tailored to special tourist interests. This process stimulates a more segmented market, with products in different price and quality ranges and across a variety of destinations.
Intensifying globalization and advances in technology, together with rising living standards and other structural factors, are expected to continue to play an important role in shaping the international travel industry into the twentyfirst century. The freer movement of people and business, the spread of modern transportation and information technology, the formation of an affluent middle class in an increasing number of developing and transition economies, changing tastes and lifestyles in the developed economies, and continuing innovations in travel products and marketing are expected to sustain the rapid expansion of international travel, gradually changing its composition and destinational structure by fostering competition, enhancing productivity and quality and increasing variety. The Government's role in planning and harmonizing this process will continue to be important in many countries. Particularly in areas where tourism resources are overexploited, limits on social and environmental capacity will increasingly be felt and demand for remedial government action will increase.
For many developing and transition economies that have an abundance of tourism resources and low wage labour,20 this industry can continue to serve as a strategic alternative avenue for foreign currency earnings. In particular, as modern air connections open up, an increasing number of developing economies that are geographically remote from the major sources of tourists will emerge as new competitive destinations in the world travel market. The change in the preferences of travellers towards new, unexplored destinations also favours such countries. Given their potential for tourism exports and their increasing awareness of the opportunities, the gradual shift in destinational structure towards these economies is expected to continue.
The freer movement of financial capital and travel enterprises will help overcome the difficulties in financing the development of the travel industry in developing and transition economies. In particular, the expansion of multinational hotel networks will continue and the combining of their capital and knowhow with local low-wage labour and natural tourism resources will help augment competitiveness in the local travel industry. These multinational networks will also provide a marketing advantage. However, the content of the contractual arrangements between multinational hotel chains and local hotels is important in determining the extent of their contribution to the local tourism industry.
Developed economies can continue to build upon the advantage gained through their well-established domestic tourism industry and infrastructures, better technology and more abundant human and financial capital. The widening international networks of their highly competitive hotel chains, airlines and travel agencies, combined with globalizing information systems, will continue to be instrumental in bringing foreign travellers to these economies.
The new areas of tourism can provide opportunities to developed economies because of their superior capacities for product innovation, market segmentation and quality improvement. New or differentiated tourism products of higher quality, customized to special interests, can command higher prices and give an absolute advantage to these countries. In such areas, they can compete with low-wage developing economies by differentiating their products or upgrading product quality. By specializing in niche markets, small firms in these developed economies can find room for survival even under intense competition.
The liberalization of international travel and the multinationalization of businesses, including the travel industry, along with regional and global institutional arrangements, will continue to facilitate the expansion of the global travel market and to make national borderlines less distinct. The cost of international travel is already within the reach of the mass of potential tourists and international travel times are shorter. Multi-country tour packages have already blurred the boundaries of country specialization as tour operators cluster several destinations into one package, according to geographical proximity and complementary tourist attributes, so as to optimize travel cost and time.
Changing lifestyles, growing affluence, demographic changes and evolving work organizations brought about by spreading long-distance services will also have far-reaching implications for travel activities in the coming century.
Energy use is central to economic growth, but also to social issues that affect sustainable development, such as poverty, access to social services, environmental quality and global warming. Today's world is characterized by a rapidly rising energy demand, most notably in the rapidly growing developing countries. As people have become richer and more numerous, their demand for the services of energyusing capital and end-use durables, such as automobiles and electrical appliances, has mushroomed. Providing adequate energy supplies and services to meet these growing needs, while at the same time safeguarding the environment, poses a major challenge to policymakers worldwide. At present, about 7.3 billion tons of oil equivalent (toe) of fossil fuels are consumed annually. On average, over three quarters of these fuels are carbon, which is being emitted into the atmosphere. If nothing is done to change current energy consumption patterns and fuel mix, it is likely that carbon emissions will double in 25-30 years, and treble in 45-50 years, with possible consequences of climate change. What is needed today is a global recognition that current energy patterns are leading the world down a path that is unsustainable} Slowing the growth of carbon dioxide (C02) emissions into the atmosphere is clearly essential.
In light of the growing concerns over global warming, the international community needs to develop technology and policy options that, when fully adopted, reduce the anticipated growth in the use of energy resources.2 The prospects, however, for curtailing the growth in the use of such resources are uncertain and the policies needed to maintain the curtailment are still being negotiated. As a contribution to the debate, the present chapter explores how C02 emissions are lil..ely to evolve under alternative assumptions regarding efficiency improvements and how regional energy consumption and emissions patterns are likely to shift over the next several decades. This chapter shows that present policies to stabilize C02 emissions within the developed economies at 1990 levels by the year 2000 will fall short of solving global environmental problems. This underscores the need to adopt international along with regional approaches to greenhouse gas abatement strategies that are consistent with the objectives of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
Atmospheric concentrations of a number of greenhouse gases are essential for the existence of life on earth, as they trap some of the heat radiated by the sun in the atmosphere; but the atmospheric concentration of such gases as methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N20), chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), and CO2have increased significantly since pre-industrial times. The concentration of these so-called greenhouse gases in the atmosphere continues to increase at a rapid rate as a result of emissions from human activities. A further rapid rise in the concentration of these gases in the atmosphere is expected to lead to a warming of the earth's average surface temperature - a phenomenon commonly called global climate change - with uncertain but potentially grave consequences.
Prior to the Industrial Revolution, the concentration of greenhouse gases remained nearly constant throughout modern human history about 280 parts per million by volume (ppmv) (0.028 per cent of the atmosphere's volume).
However, according to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 4 (IPCC), those concentrations increased to about 360 ppmv. 5 As a result, the world surface temperature has risen by 0.30 C - 0.60 C (Celsius) within the last 100 years. During this same period, the global sea level has risen by between 10-25 centimetres (cm), with much of the rise having possibly been induced by the increase in global temperature.
IPCC also estimated that CO2 has contributed about 65 per cent of the combined radiative effects (a measure of global warming) of the major greenhouse gases over the past 100 years. 6 According to one of the climate scenarios most often cited, the IS92 of IPCC, the world may see an increase of the atmospheric CO2 concentration ranging from about 480 ppmv to 960 ppmv by the year 2100.
This rise in concentration is expected to lead to an increase of average surface temperature of 1.0∞ C - 3S C by the year 2100, with a best estimate of 2.0∞C.
There is still considerable uncertainty regarding the timing, magnitude, regional manifestations and nature of climate change. The consensus, however, is that the continuing emissions of greenhouse gases, such as CO2, may lead to a rise in global mean temperature. Therise in temperature, scientists warn, will have a variety of effects, including a rise in sea levels and major changes in wind and rainfall patterns, as well as adverse impacts on biodiversity and ecosystems. Such a drastic change might have enormous economic and social implications and pose huge threats to low-lying coastal areas and small islands.
The major anthropogenic source of CO2 emissions is the combustion of fossil fuels (oil, gas and coal) to produce energy. As such, fossil fuel consumption levels are critical to the analysis of the accumulation of CO2 in the atmosphere and the determination of the likelihood and timing ofclimate change. 7
Between 1975 and 1994, annual growth in world commercial energy use averaged 1.3 per cent in the developed countries, 2.0 per cent in the former centrally planned economies and 5.5 per cent in the developing countries. Despite this high rate of growth of energy consumption in developing countries, current per capita consumption in developed countries is more than 20 times that in a large number of developing countries. In Mrica, for example, per capita commercial energy consumption in 1994 amounted to only 305 kilograms of oil equivalent (kgoe) per year, compared with about 8,000 kgoe in the United States of America.
At present, nearly 90 per cent of the world's primary commercial energy consumption needs are met by fossil fuels. Between 1975 and 1994, world energy consumption increased by about 55 per cent, while energy-related carbon emissions grew 40 per cent, from about 4.3 billion to 6 billion metric tonsB (figure XLI). C02 emissions grew two and a half times in the developing countries, compared with 15 per cent in the developed countries over the same period. However, the developed countries accounted for about 50 per cent of the global C02 emissions in 1994. The developing countries accounted for 36 per cent and the economies in transition for 14 per cent. The seeming levelling off of C02 emissions in recent years is due almost entirely to the sharp fall in energy consumption in the successor States of the former Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR) following the disintegration of the USSR.
On a country-by-country basis, the United States accounted for 25 per cent of energy-related CO2 emissions, followed by China at 13 per cent and the Russian Federation at 8 per cent. Together these three countries accounted for nearly half the emissions in 1994. Five of the 15 countries with the highest energy-related C02 emissions in 1995 (China, India, Mexico, the Republic of Korea and South Africa) were from the group of developing countries (see table XU).
Over the past two decades, close to 1 billion people in developing countries have become newly connected to electricity grids.9 Despite this remarkable achievement, nearly 2 billion people still have no access to electricity and over 2 billion people are estimated to rely almost exclusively on biofuels, such as crop residues, animal dung and wood, for cooking. Close to 90 per cent of the population in many sub-Saharan African countries has almost no access to commercial energy (or is unable to afford it).
As economic growth in the industrialized countries continues and economic activity in the economies in transition rebounds, the need of these economies for more energy will be added to the rapidly growing demand in many of the developing countries. Taking these demand considerations together with the increasing population and the growing weight of the developing countries in the world economy, there is considerable reason to expect substantial growth in world energy demand. The questions are how much energy will be used and how large the opportunities are for energy conservation and improvements in efficiency. o 0
One strategy for looking at the possible future growth of energy demand and CO2 emissions is to analyse alternative scenarios, beginning with a continuation of historical relationships and introducing various alternative assumptions regarding policy and technology assumptions.
Over the past several years, there have been a number of forecasts regarding the future trends of energy demand and CO2 emissions.10 They all offer the same broad conclusion: world energy demand will grow rapidly over the next few decades, mainly because of the growth of population and income in the developing world. In the developed countries, energy demand will continue growing, but at slower rates than in developing countries. In most cases, energy supply is expected to remain abundant although supply shortages could occur, particularly if investment in the energy sector does not keep up with the growth in demand.
While a large growth in world energy demand is anticipated, there also appears to be enormous potential for offsetting much of this growth through improved efficiency in energy-using technologies. Demand for energy in the developing world is projected to surpass that in the developed economies at around the year 2010, its current share (one third) of global energy demand rising to about one half in 20 years and two thirds in 50 years. As a result, most of the growth in CO2 emissions will be accounted for by the developing countries.
The scenariosll presented below of global energy demand and CO2 emissions are based on assumptions about the following key variables: (a) future economic growth, (b) future oil prices (c) population growth and (d) energy efficiency gains, expressed as a fraction of total energy saved per year owing to advances in technology. These assumptions are outlined in table XI.2.12 The three cases presented provide an indication of the general direction and possible evolution of worldwide energy and carbon emissions trends under these particular assumptions. l-<il1llPlr'Q'V demand In the "Modest efficiency gains" scenario, it is assumed that energy-saving technologies similar to those available today in the developed countries will become more widely used, partly as a result of transfer of technologies to developing countries and partly in response to action by policy makers. It is also assumed that fossil fuel efficiency will improve slowly in all regions, particularly after the year 2010, with efficiency gains ranging from 0.2 to 0.8 per cent per year. It is further assumed that the real price of oil will rise very slowly but steadily until the year 2050. Under this scenario, world commercial energy demand is projected to grow at an annual average rate of 2.0 per cent over the projection period. This would mean a near-doubling of the present levels of consumption by the year 2025 and a 2.6-fold expansion by 2050 (see figure XI.2). Results from this scenario are consistent with the middle course scenario (scenario B) of IIASAIWEC, and with the projection of the Global Environment Outlook.
With their demand expected to rise at the rate of 3.1 per cent per annum, the developing countries are expected to account for over three quarters of the growth in world energy demand, with their share rising by two-fifths by the year 2010 and by two-thirds by the year 2050. Total commercial energy demand in the developed market economies is projected to grow by 1.0 per cent per annum, while in the economies in transition, energy demand is expected to grow at an average rate of 1.2 per cent per year. Energy demand both in the developed market economies and in the economies in transition is expected to reach a plateau around the year 2030 after which energy demand will begin to decline.
Although per capita consumption of energy in the developing countries is expected to continue rising rapidly, it will still be far below that of the industrialized countries. In 1994, per capita consumption in the developing countries was around 540 kgoe per year. By the year 2050, it will rise threefold, but this amounts to just under one fifth of the per capita energy consumption of the developed market economies.
At present, nuclear power and renewable sources of energy (NRSE) account for about 10 per cent of the world's primary commercial energy consumption.
By the year 2050, they might provide for about 20 per cent of total commercial energy demand, with their share rising rapidly in all regions.
The "Do nothing" scenario reflects a continuation of current energy consumption patterns, where authorities in many countries pay little or no attention to policies aimed at conserving energy and improving efficiency (in other words, it assumes there will be no new policy-driven gains in energy efficiency).
Energy consumption and production continue to be subsidized in many countries, and no major energy-saving technological breakthrough or conservation by consumers is anticipated. The price of oil remains constant in real terms over the projection period. Under this scenario, the world would consume twice as much energy in the year 2025 as it does today. By 2050, it would use three and one half times more energy than it uses today. The rise in global energy demand in this case would be almost 20 billion toe over the 55 years to the year 2050, with the developing countries accounting for about 15 billion toe, or 74 per cent. Much of the demand growth would be supplied by fossil fuels, with the share of NRSE rising to only 14 per cent by 2050.
In the "Forceful efficiency gains" scenario, which reflects a low energy path, there is increasing application of new technologies to reduce energy use as concerns about the environment grow. Major manufacturers of industrial equipment, building materials, household appliances and automobiles are induced to adopt more energy-saving products, and additional energy taxes and regulations are imposed. New technologies gradually emerge, leading to gains in energy efficiency of up to 1.5 per cent per annum. Under such circumstances, world energy demand will rise at an average rate of only 1.1 per cent per annum over the projection period, but much more slowly after the year 2030. In both the developed market economies and the economies in transition, energy demand will continue rising very slowly before beginning to decline around the year 2010. In the developing countries, energy demand will rise steadily at about 2.6 per cent per annum over the projection period. Overall, the world would use about 50 per cent less energy than in the "Do nothing" scenario, but nearly twice as much energy as is currently consumed. Under this scenario, by 2050, NRSE could account for 25 per cent of overall energy consumption.
One way to interpret the results of these scenarios is in terms of their implications for energy intensity. In general, trends of energy intensity are influenced by the structure of the economy, existing technologies, energy mix and fuel prices.17 While energy intensities worldwide have fallen since the early 1970s, energy intensities in developing countries have not declined. Moves by developing countries towards industrialization are usually accompanied by urbanization, electrification and modernization, all of which entail increasing use of commercial energy and hence a rise in energy intensities. During the process of industrialization, it is often difficult to decouple economic growth from energy demand, particularly in the absence of strong energy efficiency measures. Energy intensity is higher in countries with artificially low energy prices (mainly in the economies in transition and major oil exporting countries).
Energy intensities in the world as a whole are projected to decline steadily over the projection period under almost all scenarios (see table XI.3). In the Modest efficiency gains scenario, energy intensities will decline by an average annual rate of 1.6 per cent in the developed market economies, 1.2 per cent in the economies in transition and 0.4 per cent in the developing countries. In all three scenarios, however, energy intensity in the developing countries is expected to continue rising slowly before it stabilizes and starts to decline around the year 2010. In the developed countries and in the economies in transition, energy intensity will decline steadily, but at somewhat faster rates in the last two decades of the projection period. emissions There are significant differences in the regional pattern of CO2 emissions that emerge under the three scenarios (figure XI.3). By the middle of the next century, the share of the developed countries in global emissions is projected to drop to less than one third while that of the developing countries will grow to at least two thirds of the total. The reason for this shift is apparent from the pattern of energy consumption presented above, where energy consumption growth rates in developing countries are more than twice as high as those in the developed countries or the economies in transition. In the Do nothing scenario, about 8.3 billion tons will be emitted into the atmosphere by the year 2010. This figure can be expected to more than double by the year 2050, rising to 19 billion tons, two thirds of which will be accounted for by developing countries.
In the Modest efficiency gains scenario, significantly lower CO2 emission levels can be achieved in all groups of countries, most notably in the developed market economies, where emissions are expected to remain at almost the same level after the year 2010. Much more radical reduction in the growth of carbon emissions is possible under the Forceful efficiency gains scenario. In this case, growth in C02 emissions worldwide is not expected to exceed 0.7 per cent per annum over the projection period. This growth will be entirely accounted for by the developing countries after the year 2010. What distinguishes this scenario from the other two is that global CO2 emissions can be expected to decline after they peak at 8.9 billion tons by the year 2030 and that overall per capita C02 emissions will decline on average by 0.2 per cent per annum. The fall in the per capita emissions of carbon will be more pronounced in the developed market economies, but will still be 4 to 5 times higher than in the developing countries. By contrast, in the Do nothing scenario, per capita carbon emissions can be expected to rise in all regions.
Annual CO2 emissions for the three scenarios described above are shown in figure XI.4. Cumulative carbon emissions resulting from these scenarios between 1995 and 2050 range from 222 billion tons of carbon for the Forceful efficiency gains scenario to 319 billion tons of carbon for the Do nothing scenario.
When these emissions are added to the current concentration19, cumulative emissions, by 2050, are projected to be 1070 billion tons under the "Do While the Convention does not yet contain specific targets and timetables for the stabilization of greenhouse gas emissions, member States of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) and countries from eastern Europe, referred to as Annex I countries22 committed themselves in 1992 to adopting voluntary measures to mitigate climate change and to providing information on policies and measures aimed at returning their emissions of C02 and other greenhouse gases to 1990 levels by the end of this decade.
There was a diversity of approaches to voluntary target commitments by OECD countries; a number of them (Austria, Canada, Denmark, Iceland, Luxembourg, the Netherlands and Switzerland) established unilateral and unconditional commitments to targets, but others set conditions to achieve their own targets (see table XI.4). Various modifications and clarifications have been made since 1992 when most of the targets were announced. Even though most of these countries are thus implementing policies to limit greenhouse gas emissions, only a few of them are likely to achieve levels of emissions by the year 2000 that do not surpass those of 1990. According to a new proposal currently under consideration, each of the Annex I Parties shall reduce its 1990 level of anthropogenic emissions of CO2 by at least 20 per cent by the year 2005.23
Reflecting widespread concerns about the potential threat of global wanning, over 150 countries at the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development in Rio de Janeiro in 1992 signed the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. This Convention, which entered into force on 21 March 1994, has been ratified by over 160 member countries. It calls for measures to counteract the greenhouse effect. Its signatories are required to formulate plans to reduce greenhouse gas emissions but implementation is not bound by the Convention.
To this end, the ultimate objective of the Convention is "stabilization of greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere at a level that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system. Such a level should be achieved within a time-frame sufficient to allow ecosystems to adapt naturally to climate change, to ensure that food production is not threatened, and to enable economic development to proceed in a sustainable manner" (article 2 of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change). nothing" scenario, 1020 billion tons (Modest efficiency) and 970 billion tons (Forceful efficiency). While all three levels of concentration are less than the doubling of the pre-industrial concentrations, a figure taken to be 1,200 billion tons of atmospheric C02 concentrations (or 565 ppmv of CO2)20 the Do nothing and the Modest efficiency scenarios might do a great deal of damage to the environment since the doubling date could occur before the year 2100 (assuming the same trends continue after 2050). The doubling date of the CO2 from all emission sources should be earlier than that of energy-related C02 alone. The doubling of CO2 concentrations is believed to be dangerous; at this level, CO2 would trigger a rise in the mean global temperature of about 2.5∞C.21 The question is whether that dangerous situation can be avoided.
Energy-related C02 emissions in OECD countries are estimated to have risen by about 4.6 per cent between 1990 and 1995 (see table XI.5). However, only a handful of countries (Austria, France, Germany, Italy, Switzerland and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland) appear to be heading towards achieving levels of energy-related CO2 emissions by the year 2000 that are less than those of 1990. Even if these commitments were fully achieved by all OECD countries, projected global energy-related emissions would be reduced by only 4 per cent by 2000 under the scenarios discussed above; instead of rising by 15 per cent between 1990 and 2000, global emissions would grow by 11 per cent. The improvement is small because emissions reduced due to commitments by a few countries will be offset by growth in emissions elsewhere. This underscores the need for wider action plans to reduce emissions. A global target requires assuring that the sum of commitments by all countries meets the target.
A large number of developing countries have repeatedly voiced their concern that, while Agenda 2124 addressed the role of energy and its impact on climate change, it did not adequately deal with the sustainable development concerns of those developing countries that lack adequate energy resources to support economic development. As a result, they have stressed their limited obligations under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and have objected to proposals that would imply a need for them to agree to reduce their emissions without both adequate funding and technology transfer from developed countries. Nevertheless, most developing countries recognize the need to participate in the global effort to reduce the emissions of greenhouse gases to the extent that this does not impede their economic and social development progress.
In the first session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change held in Berlin in March-April 1995, participants acknowledged that developed countries were not undertaking commitments commensurate with the Convention's objective, despite their attempts to return their greenhouse gas emissions to 1990 levels by the year 2000. No new commitments were introduced for developing countries. However, at the second session of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention, convened in July 1996 in Geneva, participants agreed to speed up negotiations on the text of a legally binding protocol or another legal instrument to be submitted for adoption at the third Conference of the Parties to the Convention, scheduled to be held by the end of 1997 in Kyoto, lapan. Agreements on targets and a time-frame in which to achieve them will require concerted efforts from both industrialized and developing countries to find efficient and equitable procedures for controlling greenhouse gas emissions at the global level.
The need for energy to sustain economic growth and improve the quality of life and the necessity to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and safeguard the environment has been a contentious issue between developed and developing countries. There is a mismatch between those economies that can still grow without much need for additional energy (namely, the developed countries) and those that cannot grow without additional supplies of energy (namely,' the developing countries). Because of the present lack of available technologies to absorb CO2 emissions, abatement policies must focus more on source reduc tions than on clean-up technologies. 25 Constraints on carbon dioxide emissions are essentially constraints on the use of fossil fuels. Source reductions therefore imply reductions in the use of the least expensive and most widely available energy supplies (in other words, fossil fuels). To this end, without help from developed countries in transferring renewable energy technologies and in facilitating improvements in energy efficiency, it is not likely that developing countries, especially the poor ones, will be able to slow their C02 emissions without incurring economic penalties.
As stated in the report of the Secretary-General 26 to the Commission on Sustainable Development at its fifth session on global change and sustainable development: critical trends: "Technologies enable humans to expand their range of activities and transform the Earth's resources. Technological advances, in principle, enable more productive use of resources, thereby deliveringequivalent or improved services while greatly reducing health and environmental burdens. Two long-term trends offer particular hope for mitigation of these adverse impacts: improvements in energy and material efficiency and decarbonization of energy sources" (para. 55).
Considerable reductions in CO2 emissions from the global energy supply system are technically achievable using a range of low-polluting technologies. 27
In the short term, the main options include more efficient conversion of fossil fuels and a switch from coal to fuels lower in carbon per unit of output (that is to say, natural gas), and in the medium-to-longer term, the main option would be renewable energy technologies (primarily solar energy, biomass, geothermal energy, hydropower and wind). Other options to reduce CO2 emissions from the energy supply system include decarbonization, which entails CO2 removal from fossil fuel power station stack gases, but this option reduces the conversion efficiency and increases the cost of electricity generation. Decarbonization also encompasses removal of carbon before the fuel is burnt for power generation.
This approach is less costly and involves smaller loss of conversion efficiency. The only other important option would be switching to nuclear energy.
In some cases, such options can be mutually reinforcing.
The options selected by individual countries to reduce emissions depend upon their existing energy systems, natural resources, energy needs, technology options, and policies towards nuclear power and hydroelectricity. Substitution of low carbon content fuels for high carbon content ones is a key option with respect to reducing carbon emissions, particularly from power plants.
Electricity generation worldwide currently accounts for approximately one third of global fossil fuel consumption and half of coal consumption. Switching from coal to natural gas will certainly result in substantial reduction in the emissions of C02 and other pollutants.
Moreover, the wide variations in energy-related carbon emissions intensity (see table XLI) indicate that there is enormous scope for improving the efficiency of the energy system and for substituting low carbon content or carbonfree fuels for high carbon content ones. The scope of reducing the intensity of carbon emissions can be many orders of magnitude. For example, carbon emissions intensity is less than 100 kilograms (kg) of carbon per $1,000 of GNP in France and Japan, but higher than 1,000 kg of carbon per $1,000 of GNP in China, the Russian Federation, and Ukraine.
Similarly, the wide variation in energy intensity between countries indicates that there is a large potential for improving end-use energy efficiency. Studies show differences of 20-25 per cent between actual energy consumption and the level of energy consumption that could be achieved from more efficient technologies in the areas of lighting, transportation, buildings, refrigeration, cooking, space heating and air-conditioning. 28
Many methods have been developed for improving energy efficiency in transportation and industry, and in buildings and appliances, with substantial energy savings. Technology now commercially available can reduce energy consumption in these sectors by up to 50 per cent.A range of renewable energy technologies is being developed that could be competitive with fossil fuel energy sources within the next decade or so. These include geothermal, wind, solar, photovoltaic, alcohol fuels and biomass.
The potential of renewable energy technologies to meet a larger share of global energy needs is considerable. Technologies based on solar energy such as photovoltaic and solar-thermal schemes for power generation, wind, biomass, and geothermal energy are continuing to improve rapidly and their production costs are declining.29 With more research and development, their prospects will further improve over the coming decades. Taking environmental costs into account will make these options more economic even at the present time. The installation of these alternative technologies, which can be used in small- or large- scale operations, entails a short lead time and (except for biomass) they require small land areas. On average, the earth receives annually about 10,000 times as much energy as the world's total energy consumption, or 10 times the energy contained in all fossil fuels and uranium reserves combined.
It has been estimated that developing countries can meet all their energy needs with solar energy, using a land area equivalent to only 5 per cent or less of that now being used for agriculture.3o emissions The two main instruments for controlling greenhouse gas emissions are regulatory instruments and market-based economic instruments.31 The first approach, which encompasses environmental laws and regulations, could be very effective in reducing emissions by setting up energy efficiency standards for cars, buildings and consumer appliances. It is, however, difficult to develop and administer. The market-based approach involves mainly three mechanisms: (a) external offsets, (b) tradable emissions permits and (c) carbon taxes?2
Under an external offset mechanism, a country could meet an agreed national emissions target by financing the abatement of emissions in other countries.
External offsets are created by investing either in the reduction of emissions in other countries or in greenhouse gas "sink enhancements", such as reforestation.
However, monitoring of external offsets is very difficult, as it requires measurements and monitoring procedures that cannot be installed easily in countries with different levels of development and different bureaucracies.33
Tradable emissions permits require the establishment of an overall emissions limit (in other words, an agreeable target). Once such a target has been identified, emissions permits not exceeding the total target are allocated to each participating member. The idea of using tradable emissions permits as a tool to combat global warming has gained widespread acceptance, particularly following the publication by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) of a study on a global system of tradable carbon emission entitlement. The study argued that tradable emissions permits were not only efficient means of controlling CO2 emissions but also effective mechanisms for transferring financial resources to developing countries and to countries in transition so as to enable them to participate in the global effort to abate emissions of greenhouse gases. Tradable permits have also been cited as an effective vehicle for international technology transfer. Unlike carbon taxes with their indirect influence on emissions through higher energy prices, tradable permits allow control over the amounts of emissions. They are also less controversial than carbon taxes. Based on recent experience in the United States to reduce sulfur dioxide emissions to half their 1980 level by the year 2000, tradable permits have proved to be efficient mechanisms for controlling emissions at low cost.
While external offsets and tradable permits figure prominently in proposed economic policy responses to climate change, studies and analyses of their impacts on efficiency, equity and economic growth are of recent origin and still largely in progress. To date, the most widely used market-based mechanism to reduce emissions from the use of fossil fuels is the imposition of carbon taxes. So far, such taxes have been confined largely to developed countries. A cost-benefit analysis for a number of developing countries suggested that countries with low or non-existent energy taxes can receive substantial net gains from a carbon tax, not only in efficiency terms but also in terms of local environmental considerations.
However, because taxes can distort production, investment and consumption, the economic costs of imposing carbon taxes can adversely affect GDP growth.
A number of studies on CO2 emissions abatements have suggested that, while early reductions in emissions can be less costly, significant emissions cuts at later stages would require excessive taxes. Taxes required to reduce emissions in the United States by 45 per cent from the 1990 level by the year 2020 could range from $200 to $350 per metric ton of carbon. This compares with present energy taxes of approximately $30 per ton. Such a carbon tax is equivalent to an addition of about 50 cents-$1 per gallon of gasoline in current dollars. While energy taxes remain difficult to adopt, a new, more promising energy policy option, "ecological tax reform", in which taxation on fossil fuels is offset by reduced taxes on, for example, labour, is now being considered in a number of developed countries.
In many developing countries, energy prices are barely high enough to cover the present costs of production. It is highly unlikely, for domestic political reasons, that these Governments would be prepared to raise energy prices high enough to reduce carbon emissions significantly. Even among OECD countries, many are unlikely to impose the type of taxes, regulations, and price increases that would be required to limit their already high levels of consumption. It will therefore be necessary to introduce other complementary policies aimed at improving efficiency and reducing emissions, such as the elimination of subsidies for electricity and transport and for coal production and the introduction of economic incentives, laws and regulations with respect to use of low-polluting fuels and implementation of efficiency standards for automobiles, buildings and electrical appliances.
As international efforts to deal with climate change move from negotiations towards actions, any proposal must contain structures and procedures that harmonize short and long-term interests and must be economically justified and reasonable enough to persuade countries to ratify it. However, if countries are either unwilling or unable to agree on any universal, legally binding drastic measures to curb CO2 emissions, what are the alternatives? As in the past, the world will have to turn to technology to cushion the growth in the demand for energy without incurring economic loss. However, Governments might have to create an economic, social and commercial climate in which technology can thrive. Shifting the trend in the demand for energy through use of new technology would imply that countries were consuming less energy and producing less pollution for a given level of economic output and energy prices.

The scenarios presented in this chapter indicate that, without international cooperation, the CO2 problem will remain with us because the consumption of energy, which is a vital prerequisite of economic growth and development, will inevitably increase. Although some "decoupling" betwe~n energy consumption and economic growth will continue to occur, particularly in more developed countries, an increase in energy consumption in the developing countries will be an inevitable concomitant of rising income and population. This will result in a steady increase in carbon emissions. Efforts to abate global climate change arising from energy activities must 11180 focus on the technological options for limiting the growth of C02 emissions. Of all the options and opportunities available, the reliance on more energy-efficient technology and the use of more low-carbon and carbon-free energy sources offer the largest potential.
Policies to improve energy efficiency should be a high priority with regard to attenuating the harmful effects to the environment from rising energy consumption.
In the developed countries, technologies and measures aimed at addressing the environmental problems arising from energy consumption are either already available or at various stages of development. Improving the efficiency with which energy is used will not stop the growth of energy demand, but it could help limit the demand to about half of what it would be in the absence of efficiency improvements.
Overall, these changes are unlikely to be sufficient. They will have to be accompanied by policies, including both economic and regulatory instruments, to promote high energy efficiency and environmental standards for cars, residential and commercial buildings, and industry, as well as the electricity sector.
Such instruments, some of which have been used for environmental and energy security purposes in a number of OECD countries, include:
.. Internalization of environmental costs in the prices of services and products;
.. Abolition of subsidies for fossil fuels production and use;
.. Provision of incentives to promote less polluting energy sources, such as renewable energy;
.. Introduction of polluter pays policies;
.. Promotion of education and public information campaigns to raise environmental awareness.
In the negotiations to take place in Kyoto later this year, all countries will have to accept the fact that the burden of safeguarding the environment must be shared equitably. However, the developed countries can assume an indispensable role in facilitating improvements in energy efficiency in the less developed countries.
