13 Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts Related Topics Related Goals Related Goals Related Goals Related Goals Overview Targets and Indicators Target 13.1 Strengthen resilience and adaptive capacity to climate-related hazards and natural disasters in all countries Indicators 13.1.1 Number of deaths, missing persons and directly affected persons attributed to disasters per 100,000 population 13.1.2 Number of countries that adopt and implement national disaster risk reduction strategies in line with the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030 13.1.3 Proportion of local governments that adopt and implement local disaster risk reduction strategies in line with national disaster risk reduction strategies Target 13.2 Integrate climate change measures into national policies, strategies and planning Indicators 13.2.1 Number of countries with nationally determined contributions, long-term strategies, national adaptation plans and adaptation communications, as reported to the secretariat of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 13.2.2 Total greenhouse gas emissions per year Target 13.3 Improve education, awareness-raising and human and institutional capacity on climate change mitigation, adaptation, impact reduction and early warning Indicators 13.3.1 Extent to which (i) global citizenship education and (ii) education for sustainable development are mainstreamed in (a) national education policies; (b) curricula; (c) teacher education; and (d) student assessment Target 13.a Implement the commitment undertaken by developed-country parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change to a goal of mobilizing jointly $100 billion annually by 2020 from all sources to address the needs of developing countries in the context of meaningful mitigation actions and transparency on implementation and fully operationalize the Green Climate Fund through its capitalization as soon as possible Indicators 13.a.1 Amounts provided and mobilized in United States dollars per year in relation to the continued existing collective mobilization goal of the $100 billion commitment through to 2025 Target 13.b Promote mechanisms for raising capacity for effective climate change-related planning and management in least developed countries and small island developing States, including focusing on women, youth and local and marginalized communities Indicators 13.b.1 Number of least developed countries and small island developing States with nationally determined contributions, long-term strategies, national adaptation plans and adaptation communications, as reported to the secretariat of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change Progress and Info 2022 2021 2020 2019 2018 2017 2016 The increases in heatwaves, droughts and floods caused by climate change are destroying the planet and affecting billions of lives worldwide. Despite the temporary reduction of CO2 emissions in 2020, global energy-related CO2 emissions rose by 6.0 per cent as demand for coal, oil and gas rebounded with the economy in 2021. Based on current national commitments, global emissions are set to increase by almost 14 per cent over the current decade, which could lead to a climate catastrophe unless Governments, the private sector and civil society work together to take immediate action. However, the war in Ukraine threatens to become the cause of a huge setback for concerted efforts to speed up climate action. As at 31 December 2021, a total of 123 countries had reported the adoption of national disaster risk reduction strategies, an increase from 55 countries in 2015. The number of countries with disaster risk reduction strategies that promote policy coherence with the Sustainable Development Goals and the Paris Agreement has reached 118, compared with only 44 in 2015. The COVID-19 crisis highlighted a further accelerated global effort and an approach to disaster risk reduction strategies that is more systemic and more multi-hazard in nature. By April 2022, 193 parties (192 countries plus the European Union) had communicated their first nationally determined contribution under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and 13 parties had submitted their second nationally determined contribution. The nationally determined contributions attest that countries are articulating more quantified targets and indicators for adaptation and identifying links between adaptation and the Sustainable Development Goals and other frameworks. As at 31 March 2021, 125 of 154 developing countries were taking measures related to national adaptation plans and prioritizing formulation and implementation of national adaptation plans in their adaptation efforts. Six of the least developed countries (including three small island developing States) and an additional four small island developing States had completed a national adaptation plan. More of the least developed countries had prepared a draft national adaptation plan and were on track to complete and submit it in line with the vision of all least developed countries having their national adaptation plan by 2021. In order to limit global warming to 1.5 degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels, scientists recommend that by 2030 global emissions should be cut by 4 per cent compared with 2010 levels. According to current national commitments, however, global emissions are set to increase by almost 14 per cent during the rest of the decade. Source: For more information, please, check: Atmospheric concentrations of the major greenhouse gases continued to increase despite the temporary reduction in emissions in 2020 related to measures taken in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The six years from 2015 to 2020 are likely to be the warmest on record. Climate change is making the achievement of many Goals less likely. To limit global warming to 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels in accordance with the Paris Agreement, the world would need to achieve net zero carbon dioxide emissions by around 2050. As of April 2020, 118 countries and territories had reported the development and adoption of national or local disaster risk reduction strategies, an increase from 48 countries and territories in the first year of the Sendai Framework. As at 31 December 2020, 190 parties (189 countries and territories plus the European Union) had communicated their first nationally determined contribution to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, of which 44 were least developed countries and 40 were small island developing States. A further 48 countries and territories, of which one is a least developed country and five are small island developing States, have also communicated a second or updated nationally determined contribution. Of these 48 countries and territories, 39 included adaptation information in their new or updated contribution. The nationally determined contributions demonstrate that countries and territories are articulating more quantified targets and indicators for adaptation and identifying links between adaptation, the Goals and other frameworks. As at 31 March 2021, 125 of 154 developing countries were carrying out measures for national adaptation plans and prioritizing the formulation and implementation of the plans in their adaptation efforts. Moreover, six least developed countries (including three small island developing States) and another four small island developing States have completed a national adaptation plan. Further least developed countries have draft national adaptation plans and are on track to complete and submit these with a view to ensuring that all least developed countries have national adaptation plans by 2021. According to scientists, global emissions should be cut to 45 per cent below 2010 levels by 2030 in order to limit global warming to 1.5°C above pre -industrial levels. Emissions from developed countries were approximately 6.2 per cent lower in 2019 than in 2010, while emissions from 70 developing countries rose by 14.4 per cent in 2014. Total climate finance reported by States parties included in annex I to the Framework Convention on Climate Change continues to increase, reaching an annual average of $48.7 billion in the period 2017–2018. This represents an increase of 10 per cent compared to the 2015–2016 period. While more than half of all climatespecific financial support in the 2017 and 2018 was targeted at mitigation action, the share of adaptation support is growing, and many countries and territories are prioritizing adaptation in their financial support provision. Source: The year 2019 was the second warmest on record and the end of the warmest decade, 2010 to 2019. In addition, with a global average temperature of 1.1°C above estimated pre-industrial levels, the global community is far off track to meet either the 1.5 or 2°C targets called for in the Paris Agreement. Although greenhouse gas emissions are projected to drop by 6 per cent in 2020, and air quality has improved as a result of travel bans and the economic slowdown resulting from the pandemic, the improvement is only temporary. Governments and businesses should utilize the lessons learned to accelerate the transitions needed to achieve the Paris Agreement, redefine the relationship with the environment and make systemic shifts and transformational changes to lower greenhouse gas emissions and climate-resilient economies and societies. A total of 85 countries have reported having a national disaster risk reduction strategy aligned with the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030 to some extent since its adoption in 2015. In 2018, 55 countries reported that at least some of their local governments had a local disaster risk reduction strategy aimed at contributing to sustainable development and strengthening socioeconomic health and environmental resilience by focusing on poverty eradication, urban resilience and climate change adaptation. As at 31 March 2020, 186 parties (185 countries plus the European Union) had communicated their first nationally determined contribution, and several parties had communicated their second or updated nationally determined contribution to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. Parties have been requested to update existing nationally determined contributions or communicate new ones by 2020, providing a valuable opportunity for parties to increase their level of ambition in climate action. In 2019, at least 120 of 153 developing countries had undertaken activities to formulate and implement national adaptation plans, an increase of 29 countries, compared with 2018. The plans will help countries achieve the global goal on adaptation under the Paris Agreement. With regard to global climate finance, there was an increase of $584 billion, or 17 per cent, from 2013 to 2014 and of $681 billion from 2015 to 2016. High levels of new private investment in renewable energy account for the spurt in growth and represent the largest segment of the global total. While these financial flows are considerable, they are relatively small in relation to the scale of annual investment needed for a low-carbon, climate-resilient transition. Moreover, investments in climate activities tracked across sectors were still surpassed by those related to fossil fuels in the energy sector alone ($781 billion in 2016). Source: Progress towards the Sustainable Development Goals, Report of the Secretary-General, With rising greenhouse gas emissions, climate change is occurring at rates much faster than anticipated and its effects are clearly felt worldwide. While there are positive steps in terms of the climate finance flows and the development of nationally determined contributions, far more ambitious plans and accelerated action are needed on mitigation and adaptation. Access to finance and strengthened capacities need to be scaled up at a much faster rate, particularly for least developed countries and small island developing States. Increasing greenhouse gas emissions are driving climate change. In 2017, greenhouse gas concentrations reached new highs, with globally averaged mole fractions of CO2 at 405.5 parts per million (ppm), up from 400.1 ppm in 2015, and at 146 per cent of pre-industrial levels. Moving towards 2030 emission objectives compatible with the 2°C and 1.5°C pathways requires a peak to be achieved as soon as possible, followed by rapid reductions. As indicated under Sustainable Development Goal 1 (see para. 22 above), during the period 1998–2017, direct economic losses from disasters were estimated at almost $3 trillion. Climate-related and geophysical disasters claimed an estimated 1.3 million lives. As of April 2019, 185 parties had ratified the Paris Agreement. Parties to the Paris Agreement are expected to prepare, communicate and maintain successive nationally determined contributions, and 183 parties had communicated their first nationally determined contributions to the secretariat of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, while 1 party had communicated its second. Under the Agreement, all parties are required to submit new nationally determined contributions, containing revised and much more ambitious targets, by 2020. Global climate finance flows increased by 17 per cent in the period 2015–2016 compared with the period 2013–2014. As at 20 May 2019, 28 countries had accessed Green Climate Fund grant financing for the formulation of national adaptation plans and other adaptation planning processes, with a value of $75 million. Of these, 67 per cent were for least developed countries, small island developing States and African States. Proposals from an additional seven countries, with a value of $17 million, are in the final stage of approval. In total, 75 countries are seeking support from the Green Climate Fund for national adaptation plans and other adaptation planning processes, with a combined value of $191 million. Source: Report of the Secretary-General, The year 2017 was one of the three warmest on record and was 1.1 degrees Celsius above the pre-industrial period. An analysis by the World Meteorological Organization shows that the five-year average global temperature from 2013 to 2017 was also the highest on record. The world continues to experience rising sea levels, extreme weather conditions (the North Atlantic hurricane season was the costliest ever recorded) and increasing concentrations of greenhouse gases. This calls for urgent and accelerated action by countries as they implement their commitments to the Paris Agreement on Climate Change. As of 9 April 2018, 175 Parties had ratified the Paris Agreement and 168 Parties (167 countries plus the European Commission) had communicated their first nationally determined contributions to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change Secretariat. In addition, as of 9 April 2018, 10 developing countries had successfully completed and submitted the first iteration of their national adaptation plans for responding to climate change. Developed country Parties continue to make progress towards the goal of jointly mobilizing $100 billion annually by 2020 to address the needs of developing countries in the context of meaningful mitigation actions. Source: Report of the Secretary-General, Planetary warming continued in 2016, setting a new record of about 1.1 degrees Centigrade above the preindustrial period, according to the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) Statement on the State of the Global Climate in 2016. Drought conditions predominated across much of the globe, aggravated by the El Niño phenomenon In the Statement, WMO also noted that the extent of global sea ice fell to a minimum of 4.14 million km2 in 2016, the second lowest extent on record. Atmospheric carbon dioxide levels also reached a record high of 400 parts per million that year. Mitigating climate change and its impacts will require building on the momentum achieved by the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, which entered into force on 4 November 2016. Stronger efforts are needed to build resilience and limit climate-related hazards and natural disasters. Parties to the Paris Agreement are expected to prepare, communicate and maintain successive nationally determined contributions. The nationally determined contributions reflect official country responses to climate change and contributions to global climate action. As of 20 April 2017, 143 parties ratified the Paris Agreement, of which 137 parties (136 countries and the European Commission) communicated their first nationally determined contributions to the secretariat of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. As of 20 April 2017, seven developing countries successfully completed and submitted the first iteration of their national adaptation plans, in response to climate change. Developed countries have committed to jointly mobilizing $100 billion per year by 2020 to address the climate-related needs of developing countries and to continue that level of support through 2025. Initial efforts to mobilize resources for the Green Climate Fund raised $10.3 billion and developed - country parties are strongly urged to scale up their financial support. The number of deaths attributed to natural disasters continues to rise, despite progress in implementing disaster risk reduction strategies. From 1990 to 2015, more than 1.6 million people died in internationally reported natural disasters. Many countries have begun implementing national and local disaster risk reduction strategies. In 2014-2015, most reporting countries indicated that environmental impact assessments, legislation on protected areas, climate change adaptation projects and programmes, and integrated planning played a major role in reducing underlying risk factors. Source: Report of the Secretary-General, "Progress towards the Sustainable Development Goals", Climate change presents the single biggest threat to development, and its widespread, unprecedented impacts disproportionately burden the poorest and most vulnerable. Urgent action to combat climate change and minimize its disruptions is integral to the successful implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals. The global nature of climate change calls for broad international cooperation in building resilience and adaptive capacity to its adverse effects, developing sustainable low-carbon pathways to the future, and accelerating the reduction of global greenhouse gas emissions. On 22 April 2016, 175 Member States signed the Paris Agreement under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. The new agreement aims to reduce the pace of climate change and to accelerate and intensify the actions and investments needed for a sustainable low-carbon future. Climate change often exacerbates disasters. Between 1990 and 2013, more than 1.6 million people died in internationally reported disasters, with annual deaths trending upwards. As a result, more countries are acting on the imperative to implement national and local disaster risk reduction strategies. In 2015, 83 countries had legislative and/or regulatory provisions in place for managing disaster risk. Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change are responsible for providing a range of national reports on their efforts to implement the agreement. As of 4 April 2016, 161 intended nationally determined contributions, from 189 of the 197 Parties to the Framework Convention (the European Commission submitted one joint intended determined contribution) had been recorded by the secretariat of the Framework Convention, providing insights into the efforts many countries are taking to integrate climate change measures into national policies, strategies and planning. Among those countries, 137 parties included an adaptation component in their intended nationally determined contributions. Some countries stressed that adaptation was their main climate change priority, with strong linkages to other aspects of national development, sustainability and security. In order to help countries move forward on climate action, a global stocktaking was established, in the context of the Paris Agreement, to assess collective progress every five years. The process will begin in 2018, with a facilitative dialogue to review the efforts of parties towards emissions reductions and to inform the preparation of final nationally determined contributions. As parties scale up climate change action, enhanced cooperation, capacity-building and access to financial and technical support will be needed to help many countries realize their priorities, including those identified in intended nationally determined contributions and national adaptation plans. Developed countries have committed to mobilizing, by 2020, $100 billion a year in climate financing from a wide variety of sources to help address the needs of developing countries. By 2025, parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change will set a new collective goal of at least $100 billion per year. The Green Climate Fund, a mechanism within the Framework Convention created to assist developing countries in adaptation and mitigation practices, is an important delivery vehicle for this financing. As of May 2016, the Green Climate Fund had mobilized $10.3 billion. Climate change is already affecting the most vulnerable countries and populations, in particular the least developed countries and the small island developing States. The preparation of national adaptation programmes of action under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change is helping the least developed countries address urgent and immediate needs, with support from the Least Developed Countries Fund and the Least Developed Countries Expert Group. In addition, the implementation of national adaptation programmes of action will help the least developed countries prepare and seek funding for comprehensive national adaptation plans, thereby reducing their risk of being left behind. Source: Report of the Secretary-General, "Progress towards the Sustainable Development Goals", EVENTS Related Goals Related Goals Related Goals Related Goals Publications News Related Goals Related Goals Related Goals
GOAL 13: CLIMATE ACTION Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts Goal 13 aims to combat climate change and its impacts by taking urgent action. Climate change and environmental degradation are equity issues that undermine the rights of every child, especially the most disadvantaged. The realization of children’s rights, as embedded throughout the SDGs, are contingent on taking action to address and adapt to climate change. Climate change is a direct threat to a child’s ability to survive, grow and thrive. While children are the least responsible for the changing environment, close to 90 per cent of the burden of disease attributable to climate change is borne by children under the age of 5. Every year, over half a million children under the age of 5 die from causes related to air pollution. Even more will suffer lasting damage to their developing brains and lungs. Today, for the first time, a global generation of children will grow up in a world made far more dangerous and uncertain by changing climate and a degraded environment. UNICEF works with partners at the global and local levels to ensure that children can live in a safe and clean environment. UNICEF helps put children at the centre of climate change strategies and response plans, recognizing them as agents of change who are taking action everywhere to protect the future of the planet. Data are required to accelerate strategies and actions on priority areas for children and climate action. Climate change related data/evidence on areas most relevant to children is scarce, specifically on interlinkages between climate and child health, nutrition, education, displacement, migration, etc. Collecting and disaggregating Goal 13 targets and indicators is vital to understanding how and where children are being left behind in the context of addressing climate change. Child-related SDG indicators TARGET 13.1 Strengthen resilience and adaptive capacity to climate-related hazards and natural disasters in all countries The Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030 was adopted by UN Member States in March 2015 as a global policy of disaster risk reduction. Among the global targets, “Target A: Substantially reduce global disaster mortality by 2030, aiming to lower average per 100,000 global mortality between 2020-2030 compared with 2005-2015” and “Target B: Substantially reduce the number of affected people globally by 2030, aiming to lower the average global figure per 100,000 between 2020-2030 compared with 2005-2015” will contribute to sustainable development and strengthen economic, social, health and environmental resilience. The economic, environmental and social perspectives would include poverty eradication, urban resilience, and climate change adaptation. The open-ended intergovernmental expert working group on indicators and terminology relating to disaster risk reduction (OIEWG) established by the General Assembly (resolution 69/284) has developed a set of indicators to measure global progress in the implementation of the Sendai Framework, which was endorsed by the UNGA (OIEWG report A/71/644). The relevant global indicators for the Sendai Framework will be used to report for this indicator. Disaster loss data is greatly influenced by large-scale catastrophic events, which represent important outliers. UNISDR recommends countries report the data by event, so that complementary analysis can be undertaken to obtain trends and patterns in which such catastrophic events (that can represent outliers) can be included or excluded. This indicator measures the number of people who died, went missing or were directly affected by disasters per 100,000 population. Death: The number of people who died during the disaster, or directly after, as a direct result of the hazardous event. Missing: The number of people whose whereabouts is unknown since the hazardous event. It includes people who are presumed dead, for whom there is no physical evidence such as a body, and for which an official/legal report has been filed with competent authorities. Directly affected: The number of people who have suffered injury, illness or other health effects; who were evacuated, displaced, relocated or have suffered direct damage to their livelihoods, economic, physical, social, cultural and environmental assets. Indirectly affected are people who have suffered consequences, other than or in addition to direct effects, over time, due to disruption or changes in economy, critical infrastructure, basic services, commerce or work, or social, health and psychological consequences. 𝑋 = ((𝐴2+𝐴3+𝐵1) / 𝐺𝑙𝑜𝑏𝑎𝑙 𝑃𝑜𝑝𝑢𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛)×100,000 Where: A2 Number of deaths attributed to disasters; A3 Number of missing persons attributed to disasters; and B1 Number of directly affected people attributed to disasters. * Detailed methodologies can be found in the Technical Guidance (see below the Reference section) The Sendai Framework Monitoring System has been developed to measure the progress in the implementation of the Sendai Framework by UNGA endorsed indicators. Member States will be able to report through the System from March 2018. The data for SDG indicators will be compiled and reported by UNISDR. Proxy, alternative and additional indicators: In most cases international data sources only record events that surpass some threshold of impact and use secondary data sources which usually have non uniform or even inconsistent methodologies, producing heterogeneous datasets. Click on the button below to explore the data behind this indicator. Key asks UNICEF has nine key asks that encourage governments conducting a Voluntary National Review to ensure their reports on SDG 13: Support continuous and environmentally-focused education during the pandemic.Make children and child voices/solutions the centre of climate change and environmental strategies and plans.Enhance ambition of mitigation and adaptation approaches for children and youth.Recognize children as agents of change.Protect children from the impacts of climate change.Reduce greenhouse gases and promote sustainable energy investments.Address environmental degradation and reduce the effect of harmful pollutants on children.Accelerate and scale up investments to strengthen resilience and adaptive capacity of children to climate impacts.Reduce inequity to promote resilience to climate change. Learn more about See more Sustainable Development Goals NO POVERTY ZERO HUNGER GOOD HEALTH AND WELL-BEING QUALITY EDUCATION GENDER EQUALITY CLEAN WATER AND SANITATION AFFORDABLE AND CLEAN ENERGY DECENT WORK AND ECONOMIC GROWTH REDUCED INEQUALITIES CLIMATE ACTION PEACE, JUSTICE AND STRONG INSTITUTIONS PARTNERSHIPS FOR THE GOALS
share this Goal 13 - Climate Action Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts Targets 13.1Strengthen resilience and adaptive capacity to climate-related hazards and natural disasters in all countries13.2Integrate climate change measures into national policies, strategies and planning13.3Improve education, awareness-raising and human and institutional capacity on climate change mitigation, adaptation, impact reduction and early warning13.aImplement the commitment undertaken by developed-country parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change to a goal of mobilizing jointly $100 billion annually by 2020 from all sources to address the needs of developing countries in the context of meaningful mitigation actions and transparency on implementation and fully operationalize the Green Climate Fund through its capitalization as soon as possible13.bPromote mechanisms for raising capacity for effective climate change-related planning and management in least developed countries and small island developing States, including focusing on women, youth and local and marginalized communities13 *Acknowledging that the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change is the primary international, intergovernmental forum for negotiating the global response to climate change. SEE MORE news guest articles policy briefs Events More SDGs
Our Work CASE STUDY ON CLIMATE ACTION CASE STUDY ON CLIMATE ACTION Disclaimer: All the student projects present preliminary research and do not represent the official views of the City or City employees. For any questions regarding the students' work, please contact . Metadata Term: Summer 2018 SDG Addressed As a C40 City, the City of Los Angeles is very engaged with Climate Change efforts. The Climate Change case study aligns to SDG Goal 13: Climate Action. While Goal 13 directly addresses climate change, this is a cross-cutting issue that encompasses all of the SDGs. Thus, leveraging climate change as a case study allows the intersectionalities between the SDG goals to be studied and recommendations to be made across all of the goals. The case study was completed in partnership with students from the UCLA Luskin School of Public Affairs and Thunderbird School of Global Management at Arizona State University, with support from Caltech and NASA. SDG 13: Climate Action proposes targets that take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts. As a city, Los Angeles has been at the forefront of efforts to combat climate change through our City of L.A.’s Green New Deal (City of L.A.’s Sustainability pLAn) and Resilient L.A., as well as in partnership with cities around the country (Climate Mayors) and around the world (C40, 100 Resilient Cities). Given the number of targets and commitments already in place, the summer student cohort sought to produce a series of deliverables demonstrating how the SDG framework could inform implementation of the City’s sustainability and resiliency initiatives. They first aligned the three plans, seeking to understand both gaps and overlaps; they then looked at best practices across other cities, and finally, they developed recommendations based on the first two deliverables to mitigate the impact of various climate change-related threats on different vulnerable populations within the City. The best practices from other Cities and the intersectionality of the SDGs offer the chance to consider how the impact of climate threats may be felt differently across our community, and likewise, how to tailor and prioritize mitigation and adaptation planning to account for those different populations. Best Practices SAN FRANCISCOUHI (Urban Heat Island) index for a neighborhood level Can use to tailor mitigation by neighborhoods in LA. NEW YORK CITYCoordinated effort by the city to mitigate climate change LA could showcase each department’s commitments and progress. BOSTONProjections of economic losses due to climate events Use the cost of inaction to prioritize climate resilience initiatives. COPENHAGENFeasibility analysis determining the strength of goals Assess probability and severity when prioritizing adaptation plans. Climate Change Threats and Vulnerable Populations Best practices and the intersectionality of the SDGs point to considering the varied impact of climate threats, how they may be felt differently across our community, and likewise, how to tailor mitigation and adaptation planning to account for the needs of our most vulnerable. The four climate change threats we identified to be most relevant to the City of Los Angeles are heat, drought, fire, and sea-level rise and flooding. And the five most vulnerable populations that we identified were the unsheltered, elderly, low-income, children and those with disabilities. Heat Creation of a neighborhood UHI index in LA to prioritize adaptation and mitigation efforts Using a tree canopy analysis tool to strategically target tree planting locations Improving heat-health alert warning systems through SMS and phone call alerts Incorporate green roof research and implementation into Sustainability pLAn Expansion of Cooling Centers in disadvantaged communities that lack access to green spaces Increasing community awareness in most vulnerable communities through accessible and multilingual workshops Drought Restore the tree canopy to retain excess rainwater and releasing water during droughts Provide drought education to increase awareness Encourage community participation in drought-related initiatives and strategies Track water trends within the city in order to increase transparency Have the city work with local water agencies to adopt drought-responsive pricing structures Fire Expand access to wifi in public spaces to maximize WIFIRE in order to provide information to vulnerable communities that do not have regular access to internet services Provide masks to unsheltered populations after a wildfire event Sea Level Rise and Flooding Restore coastal ecosystems (such as wetland and dunes) Install dry reservoirs and water retention systems in areas expected to flood Managed retreat in areas most vulnerable to flooding Ensure that industries, especially industries that handle toxic materials and chemical, are prepared for flooding Additional Climate Change Recommendations Creation of a Green Jobs energy jobs training program designed to specifically engage underrepresented groups Further emphasize and promote renewable energies in order to attract solar and wind companies Partnerships with local universities, private sector, and the public sector to attract the underrepresented into Green Jobs pathways Disclaimer: All the student projects present preliminary research and do not represent the official views of the City or City employees. Any questions regarding the students' work, please contact .