End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture There is more than enough food produced today to feed every last one of us. Yet up to 828 million people remain chronically undernourished, amid signs of diminishing momentum towards reaching Zero Hunger. Malnutrition, meanwhile, is taking a heavy toll across developing and developed nations. While stunting -- low height for age -- is slowly decreasing, more than two billion adults, adolescents and children are now obese or overweight. The consequences are severe for public health, for national wealth, and for individuals' and communities' quality of life. These worrying trends coincide with the diminishing availability of land; increasing soil and biodiversity degradation; and more frequent and severe weather events. The impact of climate change on agriculture compounds the situation. IndicatorsThe success of the Sustainable Development Goals rests to a large extent on effective monitoring, review and follow-up processes. SDG indicators are the foundation of this new global framework for mutual accountability. FAO is the ‘custodian’ UN agency for 21 indicators, for SDGs 2, 5, 6, 12, 14 and 15 and a contributing agency for four more. Find out more Latest stories 03/03/2023 25/01/2023 See full listSee full list Highlights Share this page
GOAL 2: ZERO HUNGER End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture Goal 2 aims to end hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition, and promote sustainable agriculture by 2030. The triple burden of malnutrition – undernutrition, hidden hunger and overweight – threatens the survival, growth and development of children and young people. Well-nourished children are better able to grow and learn, to participate in their communities and to be resilient in the face of disease, disaster and other emergencies. Estimates from 2019 show that nearly 690 million people were hungry in that year, or 8.9 per cent of the world’s population. Children and young people shoulder the greatest burden of all forms of malnutrition from the poorest and most marginalized communities. Worldwide, nearly half of all deaths in children under 5 are attributable to undernutrition. In 2019, 144 million children under 5, or 21.3 per cent were stunted, 47 million or 6.9 per cent, were wasted (of which 14.3 million were severely wasted) and 38 million, or 5.6 per cent, were overweight. Malnutrition during pregnancy can also affect nutrition outcomes in children, notably one third of females aged 15 to 49 years worldwide were affected by anemia in 2016, with no notable change over the last 2 decades. UNICEF’s contribution towards reaching Goal 2 centres on nutrition, “By 2030 end all forms of malnutrition, including achieving by 2025 the internationally agreed targets on stunting and wasting in children under 5 years of age, and address the nutritional needs of adolescent girls, pregnant and lactating women, and older persons.” UNICEF also contributes to monitoring elements of indicator 2.2 on nutrition. Together with the World Health Organization and the World Bank, UNICEF is co-custodian for global monitoring of three of the four indicators that measure progress towards Target 2.2: Indicator 2.2.1 Prevalence of stunting (height for age <-2 standard deviation from the median of the WHO Child Growth Standards) among children under 5 years of age; Indicator 2.2.2a Prevalence of wasting (weight for height <-2 standard deviation from the median of the WHO Child Growth Standards) among children under 5 years of age; Indicator 2.2.2b Prevalence of overweight (weight for height >+2 standard deviation from the median of the WHO Child Growth Standards) among children under 5 years of age; the fourth indicator under target 2.2, Indicator 2.2.3, is Prevalence of anaemia in women aged 15 to 49 years, by pregnancy status. Child-related SDG indicators TARGET 2.2 By 2030, end all forms of malnutrition, including achieving, by 2025, the internationally agreed targets on stunting and wasting in children under 5 years of age, and address the nutritional needs of adolescent girls, pregnant and lactating women and older persons Child stunting refers to a child who is too short for his or her age and is the result of chronic or recurrent malnutrition. Stunting is a contributing risk factor to child mortality and is also a marker of inequalities in human development. Stunted children fail to reach their physical and cognitive potential. Child stunting is also one of the World Health Assembly 2025 global nutrition target indicators. Percentage of under-fives falling below minus 2 standard deviations (moderate and severe) from the median height-for-age of the reference population UNICEF, WHO and the World Bank group jointly review new data sources to update the country level estimates. Each agency uses their existing mechanisms for obtaining data. For WHO, see published database methodology (2). UNICEF undertakes a wide consultative process of compiling and assessing data from national sources for the purposes of updating its global databases on the situation of children. UNICEF regularly reviews major repositories of potential sources (e.g. Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys website, the Global Health Data Exchange) and also uses the UNICEF country consultation process with national authorities on selected child-related global SDG indicators, for which it is custodian or co-custodian. This allows for the emerging standards and guidelines on data flows for global reporting of SDG indicators to be met. These processes place strong emphasis on technical rigour, country ownership and use of official data and statistics. The consultation process solicits feedback directly from National Statistical Offices, as well as other government agencies responsible for official statistics, on the compilation of the indicators, including the data sources used and the application of global standard definitions. The World Bank Group provides estimates available through the Living Standard Measurement Surveys (LSMS) which usually requires re-analysis of datasets given that the LSMS reports often do not tabulate the stunting data. Survey estimates are based on standardized methodology using the WHO Child Growth Standards as described elsewhere (1). Global and regional estimates are based on methodology outlined in UNICEF-WHO-The World Bank: Joint child malnutrition estimates – Levels and trends (2,3) Click on the button below to explore the data behind this indicator. Child growth is an internationally accepted outcome area reflecting child nutritional status. Child overweight refers to a child who is too heavy for his or her height. This form of malnutrition results from expending too few calories for the amount of food consumed and increases the risk of noncommunicable diseases later in life. Child overweight is one of the World Health Assembly nutrition target indicators. Prevalence of overweight (weight for height >+2 standard deviation from the median of the World Health Organization (WHO) Child Growth Standards) among children under 5 years of age. UNICEF, WHO and the World Bank group jointly review new data sources to update the country level estimates. Each agency uses their existing mechanisms for obtaining data. For WHO, see published database methodology (de Onis et al. 2004). For UNICEF, the cadre of dedicated data and monitoring specialists working at national, regional and international levels in 190 countries routinely provide technical support for the collection and analysis of data. For the past 20 years UNICEF has undertaken an annual process to update its global databases, called Country Reporting on Indicators for Goals (CRING). This exercise is done in close collaboration with UNICEF country offices with the purpose of ensuring that UNICEF global databases contain updated and internationally comparable data. UNICEF country offices are invited to submit, through an online system, nationally representative data for over 100 key indicators on the well-being of women and children, including stunting. The country office staff work with local counterparts to ensure the most relevant data are shared. Updates sent by the country offices are then reviewed by sector specialists at UNICEF headquarters to check for consistency and overall data quality of the submitted estimates and re-analysis where possible. This review is based on a set of objective criteria to ensure that only the most reliable information is included in the databases. Once reviewed, feedback is made available on whether or not specific data points are accepted, and if not, the reasons why. UNICEF uses these data obtained through CRING to feed into the joint dataset. The World Bank Group provides estimates availabe through the Living Standard Measurement Surveys (LSMS) which ussually requires re-analysis of datasets given theat the LSMS reports often do not tabulate the stunting data. Survey estimates are based on standardized methodology using the WHO Child Growth Standards as described elsewhere (Ref: Anthro software manual). Global and regional estimates are based on methodology outlined in UNICEF-WHO-The World Bank: Joint child malnutrition estimates – Levels and trends (UNICEF/WHO/WB 2012). Click on the button below to explore the data behind this indicator. Anaemia is a condition of low blood heamoglobin concentration which affects over half a billion women of reproductive age worldwide. Anaemia impairs health and well-being of women and negatively affects their cognitive and motor development and work capacity. Iron deficiency, one of the most common cause of anaemia is associated with adverse reproductive outcomes, including preterm delivery, low-birth-weight infants, and decreased iron stores for the baby, which may lead to impaired development. Anaemia among women of reproductive age is also one of the World Health Assembly 2025 global nutrition target indicators. Percentage of women aged 15-49 years with a haemoglobin level less than 120 g/L for non-pregnant women and lactating women, and less than 110 g/L for pregnant women, adjusted for altitude and smoking A PubMed search was carried out for relevant search terms related to anaemia, haemoglobin and iron status, searching for studies published after 1 January 1990. In addition to indexed articles, many reports of national and international agencies were identified and accessed through requests to each corresponding organization. Once survey data are compiled and the Bayesian hierarchical mixture model is run to generate anaemia estimates, countries are sent a memorandum to provide a background to the estimates and explain the process. Information on the survey data used to generate the estimates for that country, estimates for the year 2015, and the resulting plots for each country are provided along with an explanation of the methodology used in generating the estimates. Countries are requested to provide feedback within six weeks. The anaemia status of women is assessed using blood haemoglobin concentrations. In surveys, blood haemoglobin concentrations are typically measured using the direct cyanmethemoglobin method in a laboratory or with a portable, battery-operated, haemoglobin photometer in the field that uses the azide-methaemoglobin method. Prevalence of anaemia and/or mean haemoglobin in women of reproductive age were obtained from 303 population-representative data sources from 116 countries worldwide. Data collected from 1990 to 2016 were used. Adjustment of data on blood haemoglobin concentrations for altitude and smoking was carried out whenever possible. Biologically implausible haemoglobin values (200 g/L) were excluded. A Bayesian hierarchical mixture model was used to estimate haemoglobin distributions and systematically addressed missing data, non-linear time trends, and representativeness of data sources. Full details on statistical methods may be found here: Global, regional, and national trends in haemoglobin concentration and prevalence of total and severe anaemia in children and pregnant and non-pregnant women for 1995–2011: a systematic analysis of population-representative data (Stevens et al, 2013). Briefly, the model calculates estimates for each country and year, informed by data from that country and year themselves, if available, and by data from other years in the same country and in other countries with data for similar time periods, especially countries in the same region. The model borrows data, to a greater extent, when data are non-existent or weakly informative, and to a lesser degree for data-rich countries and regions. The resulting estimates are also informed by covariates that help predict blood haemoglobin concentrations (e.g. maternal education, prevalence of sickle-cell disorders, mean weight-for-age z-score for children). The uncertainty ranges (credibility intervals) reflect the major sources of uncertainty, including sampling error, non-sampling error due to issues in sample design/measurement, and uncertainty from making estimates for countries and years without data. Key asks To put children’s nutrition rights first, there are five key asks that should be included in governments’ development plans and agendas, as well as COVID-19 response plans and budgets: Empower families, children, young people and women to demand affordable nutritious food.Drive food supplies to do the right thing for children.Build health food environments for all children.Mobilize supportive systems to scale up nutrition results for every child.Collect, analyse and use good-quality data and evidence regularly to guid action and track progress. Learn more about See more Sustainable Development Goals NO POVERTY ZERO HUNGER GOOD HEALTH AND WELL-BEING QUALITY EDUCATION GENDER EQUALITY CLEAN WATER AND SANITATION AFFORDABLE AND CLEAN ENERGY DECENT WORK AND ECONOMIC GROWTH REDUCED INEQUALITIES CLIMATE ACTION PEACE, JUSTICE AND STRONG INSTITUTIONS PARTNERSHIPS FOR THE GOALS
share this Goal 2 - Zero Hunger End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition, and promote sustainable agriculture Targets 2.1By 2030, end hunger and ensure access by all people, in particular the poor and people in vulnerable situations, including infants, to safe, nutritious and sufficient food all year round2.2By 2030, end all forms of malnutrition, including achieving, by 2025, the internationally agreed targets on stunting and wasting in children under 5 years of age, and address the nutritional needs of adolescent girls, pregnant and lactating women and older persons2.3By 2030, double the agricultural productivity and incomes of small-scale food producers, in particular women, indigenous peoples, family farmers, pastoralists and fishers, including through secure and equal access to land, other productive resources and inputs, knowledge, financial services, markets and opportunities for value addition and non-farm employment2.4By 2030, ensure sustainable food production systems and implement resilient agricultural practices that increase productivity and production, that help maintain ecosystems, that strengthen capacity for adaptation to climate change, extreme weather, drought, flooding and other disasters and that progressively improve land and soil quality2.5By 2020, maintain the genetic diversity of seeds, cultivated plants and farmed and domesticated animals and their related wild species, including through soundly managed and diversified seed and plant banks at the national, regional and international levels, and promote access to and fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from the utilization of genetic resources and associated traditional knowledge, as internationally agreed2.aIncrease investment, including through enhanced international cooperation, in rural infrastructure, agricultural research and extension services, technology development and plant and livestock gene banks in order to enhance agricultural productive capacity in developing countries, in particular least developed countries2.bCorrect and prevent trade restrictions and distortions in world agricultural markets, including through the parallel elimination of all forms of agricultural export subsidies and all export measures with equivalent effect, in accordance with the mandate of the Doha Development Round2.cAdopt measures to ensure the proper functioning of food commodity markets and their derivatives and facilitate timely access to market information, including on food reserves, in order to help limit extreme food price volatility SEE MORE news guest articles policy briefs Events More SDGs
› Sustainable Development Goal #2: Zero Hunger This project is the second out of the 17 SDGs, and has become a goal that focuses on healthy lives and promoting well-being. The unveiling for SDG 2 is expected to take place on September 23rd on . About the sponsor: Giant Foods has over 150 stores, all with a commitment to sustainability. Giant Foods is committed to developing a program that enables customers to shop based on personal preferences such as using less plastic, ensuring humane treatment of animals, finding products free from chemicals of concern and much more. Giant Foods aims to lead the industry in traceability and is focused on driving clear transparency in the supply chain. Sponsor of the project: Giant Foods Artist(s): TBD Grantee: Philabundance About: In 1984 Philabundance was founded by an idealist named Pamela Rainey Lawler who saw perfectly good food going to waste, and, at the same time, saw people going hungry. What started out as a small food rescue organization operating out of a Subaru, 30+ years later, is an innovative, impactful and collaborative organization distributing millions of pounds of food a year to those in need. Philabundance is a proud member of Feeding America, a nationwide network of food banks leading the fight against hunger in the United States. To learn more about Philabundance, visit . Location of the painting: TBD After decades of steady decline, the number of people who suffer from hunger – as measured by the prevalence of undernourishment – began to slowly increase again in 2015. Current estimates show that nearly 690 million people are hungry, or 8.9 percent of the world population – up by 10 million people in one year and by nearly 60 million in five years. The world is not on track to achieve Zero Hunger by 2030. If recent trends continue, the number of people affected by hunger would surpass 840 million by 2030. According to the World Food Programme, 135 million suffer from acute hunger largely due to man-made conflicts, climate change and economic downturns. The COVID-19 pandemic could now double that number, putting an additional 130 million people at risk of suffering acute hunger by the end of 2020. With more than a quarter of a billion people potentially at the brink of starvation, swift action needs to be taken to provide food and humanitarian relief to the most at-risk regions. At the same time, a profound change of the global food and agriculture system is needed if we are to nourish the more than 690 million people who are hungry today – and the additional 2 billion people the world will have by 2050. Increasing agricultural productivity and sustainable food production are crucial to help alleviate the perils of hunger." To learn more about SDG #2, please visit the .
Goal 2 – Zero hunger The global goals for sustainable development Goal 2 | Zero hunger End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture Parameters What should be achieved? By 2030, end hunger and ensure access by all people, in particular the poor and people in vulnerable situations, including infants, to safe, nutritious and sufficient food all year round. By 2030, end all forms of malnutrition, including achieving, by 2025, the internationally agreed targets on stunting and wasting in children under 5 years of age, and address the nutritional needs of adolescent girls, pregnant and lactating women and older persons. By 2030, double the agricultural productivity and incomes of small-scale food producers, in particular women, indigenous peoples, family farmers, pastoralists and fishers, including through secure and equal access to land, other productive resources and inputs, knowledge, financial services, markets and opportunities for value addition and non-farm employment. By 2030, ensure sustainable food production systems and implement resilient agricultural practices that increase productivity and production, that help maintain ecosystems, that strengthen capacity for adaptation to climate change, extreme weather, drought, flooding and other disasters and that progressively improve land and soil quality. By 2020, maintain the genetic diversity of seeds, cultivated plants and farmed and domesticated animals and their related wild species, including through soundly managed and diversified seed and plant banks at the national, regional and international levels, and promote access to and fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from the utilization of genetic resources and associated traditional knowledge, as internationally agreed. How should the goal be achieved? Increase investment, including through enhanced international cooperation, in rural infrastructure, agricultural research and extension services, technology development and plant and livestock gene banks in order to enhance agricultural productive capacity in developing countries, in particular least developed countries. Correct and prevent trade restrictions and distortions in world agricultural markets, including through the parallel elimination of all forms of agricultural export subsidies and all export measures with equivalent effect, in accordance with the mandate of the Doha Development Round. Adopt measures to ensure the proper functioning of food commodity markets and their derivatives and facilitate timely access to market information, including on food reserves, in order to help limit extreme food price volatility. Projects of the German Federal Association for Sustainability, which address this goal In execution Currently no project In the planning Currently no project At the concept stage Currently no project Comments are closed.