Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages Good health starts with nutrition. Without regular and nutritious food, humans cannot live, learn, fend off diseases or lead productive lives. Having established Codex Alimentarius with the World Health Organization in 1963, FAO works to strengthen the capacities of governments and the private sector to ensure food quality and safety. FAO prioritizes improvements in maternal health and promotes nutrition awareness among women and girls in an effort to break the vicious cycle that perpetuates poverty, hunger and malnutrition. For FAO, health goes beyond human health to also include animal, plant and environmental health, a approach. Healthy animals contribute to healthy people and to sustainable food production. FAO promotes best practices aimed at making animal production efficient and sustainable while protecting public health and ensuring safe trade. A growing concern, FAO devotes attention to improving farm level hygiene and vaccinations to protect animals from sickness and treatments, curbing the threat of antimicrobial resistance. Latest stories 03/03/2023 25/01/2023 Find out more FAO Publications Since 2003, the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) and the World Health Organization (WHO) of the United Nations have been leading the global initiative “Promotion of Fruit and Vegetables for Health” (PROFAV) Poor animal health causes a chain reaction of human misery. The goat disease known as PPR alone forces millions of families to leave their homes and land. To mark World Food Day, an illustration of how changing diets can improve public health and the health of the planet Share this page
› Sustainable Development Goal #3: Good Health and Well-Being Get ready for the SDG #3 Good Health and Well-Being unveiling on April 13th! This project is the third out of the 17 SDGs, and has become the third goal ensuring healthy lives and promoting well-being. Sponsor of the project: vybe urgent care Artist(s): David Guinn Grantee: TBD Location of the painting: vybe (5828 Market Street, Philadelphia, PA 19139) Ensuring healthy lives and promoting well-being at all ages is essential to sustainable development. Currently, the world is facing a unlike any other — COVID-19 is spreading human suffering, destabilizing the global economy and upending the lives of billions of people around the globe. Before the pandemic, major progress was made in . Significant strides were made in increasing life expectancy and reducing some of the common killers associated with child and maternal mortality. But more efforts are needed to fully eradicate a wide range of diseases and address many different persistent and emerging health issues. By focusing on providing more efficient funding of health systems, improved sanitation and hygiene, and increased access to physicians, significant progress can be made in helping to save the lives of millions. Health emergencies such as COVID-19 pose a global risk and have shown the critical need for preparedness. The United Nations Development Programme highlighted huge disparities in . The pandemic provides a watershed moment for health emergency preparedness and for investment in critical 21st century public services.
Goal 3 – Good health and well-being The global goals for sustainable development Goal 3 | Good health and well-being Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages Parameters What should be achieved? By 2030, reduce the global maternal mortality ratio to less than 70 per 100,000 live births. By 2030, end preventable deaths of newborns and children under 5 years of age, with all countries aiming to reduce neonatal mortality to at least as low as 12 per 1,000 live births and under-5 mortality to at least as low as 25 per 1,000 live births. By 2030, end the epidemics of AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria and neglected tropical diseases and combat hepatitis, water-borne diseases and other communicable diseases. By 2030, reduce by one third premature mortality from non-communicable diseases through prevention and treatment and promote mental health and well-being. Strengthen the prevention and treatment of substance abuse, including narcotic drug abuse and harmful use of alcohol. By 2020, halve the number of global deaths and injuries from road traffic accidents. By 2030, ensure universal access to sexual and reproductive health-care services, including for family planning, information and education, and the integration of reproductive health into national strategies and programmes. Achieve universal health coverage, including financial risk protection, access to quality essential health-care services and access to safe, effective, quality and affordable essential medicines and vaccines for all. By 2030, substantially reduce the number of deaths and illnesses from hazardous chemicals and air, water and soil pollution and contamination. How should the goal be achieved? Strengthen the implementation of the World Health Organization Framework Convention on Tobacco Control in all countries, as appropriate. Support the research and development of vaccines and medicines for the communicable and non-communicable diseases that primarily affect developing countries, provide access to affordable essential medicines and vaccines, in accordance with the Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health, which affirms the right of developing countries to use to the full the provisions in the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights regarding flexibilities to protect public health, and, in particular, provide access to medicines for all . Substantially increase health financing and the recruitment, development, training and retention of the health workforce in developing countries, especially in least developed countries and small island developing States . Strengthen the capacity of all countries, in particular developing countries, for early warning, risk reduction and management of national and global health risks. Projects of the German Federal Association for Sustainability, which address this goal In execution Currently no project In the planning Currently no project At the concept stage Currently no project Comments are closed.
share this Goal 3 - Good Health & Well-being Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages Targets 3.1By 2030, reduce the global maternal mortality ratio to less than 70 per 100,000 live births3.2By 2030, end preventable deaths of newborns and children under 5 years of age, with all countries aiming to reduce neonatal mortality to at least as low as 12 per 1,000 live births and under-5 mortality to at least as low as 25 per 1,000 live births3.3By 2030, end the epidemics of AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria and neglected tropical diseases and combat hepatitis, water-borne diseases and other communicable diseases3.4By 2030, reduce by one third premature mortality from non-communicable diseases through prevention and treatment and promote mental health and well-being3.5Strengthen the prevention and treatment of substance abuse, including narcotic drug abuse and harmful use of alcohol3.6By 2020, halve the number of global deaths and injuries from road traffic accidents3.7By 2030, ensure universal access to sexual and reproductive health-care services, including for family planning, information and education, and the integration of reproductive health into national strategies and programmes3.8Achieve universal health coverage, including financial risk protection, access to quality essential health-care services and access to safe, effective, quality and affordable essential medicines and vaccines for all3.9By 2030, substantially reduce the number of deaths and illnesses from hazardous chemicals and air, water and soil pollution and contamination3.aStrengthen the implementation of the World Health Organization Framework Convention on Tobacco Control in all countries, as appropriate3.bSupport the research and development of vaccines and medicines for the communicable and non-communicable diseases that primarily affect developing countries, provide access to affordable essential medicines and vaccines, in accordance with the Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health, which affirms the right of developing countries to use to the full the provisions in the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights regarding flexibilities to protect public health, and, in particular, provide access to medicines for all3.cSubstantially increase health financing and the recruitment, development, training and retention of the health workforce in developing countries, especially in least developed countries and small island developing States3.dStrengthen the capacity of all countries, in particular developing countries, for early warning, risk reduction and management of national and global health risks SEE MORE news guest articles policy briefs Events More SDGs