Home Welcome to the UN-Water SDG 6 Data Portal Sustainable Development Goal 6 on water and sanitation (SDG 6) SDG 6 seeks to ensure safe drinking water and sanitation for all, focusing on the sustainable management of water resources, wastewater and ecosystems, and acknowledging the importance of an enabling environment. In the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, countries have committed to engage in systematic follow-up and review of progress towards the Goals and targets, using a set of global indicators. Global Status Drinking water 74.266034170312 6.1.1 of the world’s population uses a safely managed drinking water service (SDG indicator 6.1.1, 2020) Sanitation 53.950146302681 6.2.1a of the world’s population uses a safely managed sanitation service (SDG indicator 6.2.1a, 2020) Hygiene 70.739609017098 6.2.1b of the world’s population has a handwashing facility with soap and water available at home (SDG indicator 6.2.1b, 2020) Wastewater 55.50296 6.3.1 of the world’s domestic wastewater is safely treated (SDG indicator 6.3.1, 2020) Water quality 60 6.3.2 of the world’s monitored water bodies has good ambient water quality (SDG indicator 6.3.2, 2020) Efficiency 19.40491 6.4.1 is the value added from the use of water by people and the economy at the global level (SDG indicator 6.4.1, 2019) Water stress 18.55 6.4.2 of the world’s renewable water resources is being withdrawn, after taking into account environmental flow requirements (SDG indicator 6.4.2, 2019) Water management 54 6.5.1 is the degree of implementation of integrated water resources management (IWRM) at the global level (SDG indicator 6.5.1, 2020) Transboundary 58.01 6.5.2 of the world’s transboundary basin areas has an operational arrangement for water cooperation (SDG indicator 6.5.2, 2020) Ecosystems 21 6.6.1 of the world’s water basins is experiencing rapid changes in the area covered by surface waters (SDG 6 indicator 6.6.1, 2020) Cooperation 8.7 6.a.1 is the global amount of water- and sanitation-related official development assistance received in 2020 (SDG indicator 6.a.1) Participation + 6.b.1 is the global average number of sub-sectors (out of 6) with a high level of participation by communities (SDG indicator 6.b.1, 2021) There are 11 global indicators to track progress towards SDG 6. The global estimates are based on country data, compiled and verified by the United Nations agencies responsible, sometimes complemented by data from other sources. For some indicators, there are not enough country data available to make a global estimate. Find a country (or area) or SDG region Disclaimer Please use ctrl+scroll × Welcome to the SDG 6 Data Portal The UN-Water SDG 6 Data Portal brings all the UN’s water and sanitation information into one place. Hydrological, environmental, social and economic information from all countries (and areas) and regions is integrated and presented in a range of infographics. Designed for decision-makers, policy advisors, technical professionals, researchers and students, there are tools to help you visualize and analyse the information, giving you a clear picture of how the world is progressing towards the various SDG 6 targets. Let’s get started! If you dive right in, remember you can hover over key features for a ‘tool tip’. And, anytime you see next to an indicator, you can click on it for a description. Detail on data sources and linked databases is in ‘About’. Start the quick guided tour In case you have any questions, please contact us on monitoring@unwater.org About the global indicators for SDG 6 SDG target 6.1 is: ‘By 2030, achieve universal and equitable access to safe and affordable drinking water for all.’ To track progress towards the target, indicator 6.1.1 monitors the proportion of population using safely managed drinking water services. Learn more about global progress towards the target . SDG target 6.2 is: ‘By 2030, achieve access to adequate and equitable sanitation and hygiene for all and end open defecation, paying special attention to the needs of women and girls and those in vulnerable situations.’ To track progress towards the target, indicator 6.2.1a monitors the proportion of population using safely managed sanitation services. Learn more about global progress towards the target . SDG target 6.2 is: ‘By 2030, achieve access to adequate and equitable sanitation and hygiene for all and end open defecation, paying special attention to the needs of women and girls and those in vulnerable situations.’ To track progress towards the target, SDG indicator 6.2.1b monitors the proportion of population with a handwashing facility with soap and water available at home. Learn more about global progress towards the target . SDG target 6.3 is: ‘By 2030, improve water quality by reducing pollution, eliminating dumping and minimizing release of hazardous chemicals and materials, halving the proportion of untreated wastewater and substantially increasing recycling and safe reuse globally’. To track progress towards the target, SDG indicator 6.3.1 monitors the proportion of total, industrial and domestic wastewater flows safely treated. Learn more about global progress towards the target . SDG target 6.3 is: ‘By 2030, improve water quality by reducing pollution, eliminating dumping and minimizing release of hazardous chemicals and materials, halving the proportion of untreated wastewater and substantially increasing recycling and safe reuse globally.’ To track progress towards the target, SDG indicator 6.3.2 monitors the proportion of bodies of water with good ambient water quality. Learn more about global progress towards the target . SDG target 6.4 is: ‘By 2030, substantially increase water-use efficiency across all sectors and ensure sustainable withdrawals and supply of freshwater to address water scarcity and substantially reduce the number of people suffering from water scarcity.’ To track progress towards the target, SDG indicator 6.4.1 monitors the change in water-use efficiency over time, measured as the ratio of dollar value added to the volume of water used. Learn more about global progress towards the target . SDG target 6.4 is: ‘By 2030, substantially increase water-use efficiency across all sectors and ensure sustainable withdrawals and supply of freshwater to address water scarcity and substantially reduce the number of people suffering from water scarcity.’ To track progress towards the target, SDG indicator 6.4.2 monitors how much freshwater is being withdrawn by all economic activities, compared to the total renewable freshwater resources available. Learn more about global progress towards the target . SDG target 6.5 is: ‘By 2030, implement integrated water resources management at all levels, including through transboundary cooperation as appropriate.’ To track progress towards the target, indicator 6.5.1 monitors the degree of integrated water resources management (IWRM) implementation, by assessing the four key dimensions of IWRM: enabling environment, institutions and participation, management instruments and financing. Learn more about global progress towards the target . SDG target 6.5 is: ‘By 2030, implement integrated water resources management at all levels, including through transboundary cooperation as appropriate.’ To track progress towards the target, indicator 6.5.2 looks at the area of a country within transboundary basins and assesses the extent to which that area is covered by operational cooperation arrangements. Learn more about global progress towards the target . SDG target 6.6 is: ‘By 2020, protect and restore water-related ecosystems, including mountains, forests, wetlands, rivers, aquifers and lakes.’ To track progress towards the target, indicator 6.6.1 tracks changes over time in water-related ecosystems such as lakes, rivers, wetlands and mangroves, with the help of earth observations. Learn more about global progress towards the target . SDG target 6.a is: ‘By 2030, expand international cooperation and capacity-building support to developing countries in water- and sanitation-related activities and programmes, including water harvesting, desalination, water efficiency, wastewater treatment, recycling and reuse technologies.’ To track progress towards the target, indicator 6.a.1 tracks the amount of water- and sanitation-related official development assistance (ODA) that is included in a government-coordinated spending plan. Learn more about global progress towards the target . SDG target 6.b is: ‘Support and strengthen the participation of local communities in improving water and sanitation management.’ To track progress towards the target, indicator 6.b.1 monitors the participation of local communities in water and sanitation management within a country, by looking at the existence of procedures in law or policy for participation, as well as the actual level of participation. Learn more about global progress towards the target .
GOAL 6: CLEAN WATER AND SANITATION Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all Goal 6 aims to ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all. Water and sanitation are critical to the health of people and the planet. Goal 6 not only addresses the issues relating to drinking water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH), but also the quality and sustainability of water resources worldwide. Improvements in drinking water, sanitation and hygiene are essential for progress in other areas of development too, such as nutrition, education, health and gender equality. Millions of people die every year from diseases associated with unsafe drinking water, sanitation and hygiene. Young children are particularly vulnerable – WASH-related diseases remain among the leading causes of death in children under 5, and they contribute to malnutrition and stunting. Each year, 300,000 children under 5 die due to diarrhoea linked to inadequate WASH. Despite significant progress, 2.2 billion people worldwide do not have safely managed drinking water services. Over half the global population, 4.2 billion people, lack safely managed sanitation services. UNICEF’s contribution towards reaching this goal centres on bringing safe drinking water, sanitation and hygiene services to homes, schools and health centres so that children can grow and learn in a safe environment. UNICEF is co-custodian for global monitoring of three indicators that measure progress towards Goal 6: Indicator 6.1.1 Proportion of population using safely managed drinking water services; Indicator 6.2.1a Proportion of population using safely managed sanitation services; and Indicator 6.2.1b Proportion of population with a hand-washing facility with soap and water available at home. Child-related SDG indicators TARGET 6.1 By 2030, achieve universal and equitable access to safe and affordable drinking water for all Safely managed drinking water means using an improved source that is accessible on premises, available when needed and free from faecal and priority chemical contamination. As such, the indicator combines information on both whether households have access to improved sources and the level of service they receive. Proportion of the population using drinking water from an improved source that is accessible on premises, available when needed and free from contamination Improved drinking water sources include the following: piped water into dwelling, yard or plot; public taps or standpipes; boreholes or tubewells; protected dug wells; protected springs; packaged water; delivered water and rainwater. A water source is considered to be ‘accessible on premises’ if the point of collection is within the dwelling, yard, or plot. ‘Available when needed’: households are able to access sufficient quantities of water when needed. ‘Free from faecal and priority chemical contamination’: water complies with relevant national or local standards. In the absence of such standards, reference is made to the WHO Guidelines for Drinking Water Quality (). E. coli or thermotolerant coliforms are the preferred indicator for microbiological quality, and arsenic and fluoride are the priority chemicals for global reporting. Household surveys and censuses currently provide information on types of basic drinking water sources and also indicate if sources are on premises. These data sources often have information on the availability of water and increasingly on the quality of water at the household level, through direct testing of drinking water for faecal or chemical contamination. These data are combined with data on availability and compliance with drinking water quality standards (faecal and chemical) from administrative reporting or regulatory bodies. The WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene (JMP) estimates drinking water service levels by fitting a regression line to all available national data points in each country. The JMP 2017 update methodology describes in more detail how data on the type of water source used and the level of service received are combined to compute the safely managed drinking water services indicator. () Data on availability and safety of drinking water are increasingly available through a combination of household surveys and administrative sources including regulators, but definitions have yet to be standardized. Data on faecal and chemical contamination, drawn from household surveys and regulatory databases, will not cover all countries immediately. However, sufficient data were available to make estimates of safely managed drinking water services for 117 countries and four out of eight SDG regions in 2019. Click on the button below to explore the data behind this indicator. TARGET 6.2 By 2030, achieve access to adequate and equitable sanitation and hygiene for all and end open defecation, paying special attention to the needs of women and girls and those in vulnerable situations Safely managed drinking water means using an improved sanitation facility that is not shared with other households and where excreta are either safely disposed of in situ or removed and treated off-site. As such, the indicator combines information on both whether households have access to improved toilets and safe treatment and disposal of the wastes produced. Proportion of population using an improved sanitation facility that is not shared with other households, from which excreta are safely disposed of in situ or removed and treated off-site Improved sanitation facilities include the following: flush or pour flush toilets to sewer systems, septic tanks or pit latrines, ventilated improved pit latrines, pit latrines with a slab, and composting toilets. Safely disposed of in situ: if pit latrines and septic tanks are not emptied and excreta are contained and treated in situ they are considered safely managed. Excreta emptied from septic tanks and pit latrines and buried in a covered pit are also counted as safely disposed of in situ. Treated offsite: excreta may also be emptied from septic tanks and pit latrines and delivered to a faecal sludge treatment plant, or conveyed in sewers to a wastewater treatment plant. For SDG monitoring, excreta receiving secondary or higher levels of treatment are considered safely managed. For detailed guidance on safe sanitation see the WHO Guidelines on Sanitation and Health () Method of computation: Household surveys and censuses provide data on use of types of basic sanitation facilities. The percentage of the population using safely managed sanitation services is calculated by combining data on the proportion of the population using different types of basic sanitation facilities with estimates of the proportion of faecal waste which is safely disposed in situ or treated off-site. The WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene (JMP) estimates sanitation service levels by fitting a regression line to all available national data points in each country. The JMP 2017 update methodology describes in more detail how data on the type of sanitation facility used and the disposal and treatment of exreta are combined to compute the safely managed sanitation services indicator. (). Data on emtpying and disposal of waste from on-site facilities and the treatment of wastewater from sewer connections are increasingly available through a combination of household surveys and administrative sources including regulators, but definitions have yet to be fully standardized. Data on containment, disposal and treatment of faecal sludge and wastewater will not cover all countries immediately. However, sufficient data were available to make estimates of safely managed sanitation services for 96 countries and for six out of eight SDG regions in 2019. Click on the button below to explore the data behind this indicator. A basic handwashing facility means having a fixed or mobile handwashing facility with soap and water available on premises. Proportion of population with a handwashing facility with soap and water available on premises A handwashing facility is a device to contain, transport or regulate the flow of water to facilitate handwashing. Handwashing facilities may be fixed or mobile and include a sink with tap water, buckets with taps, tippy-taps, and jugs or basins designated for handwashing. Soap includes bar soap, liquid soap, powder detergent, and soapy water but does not include ash, soil, sand or other handwashing agents. Observing the presence of handwashing facilities with soap and water is is a proxy indicator of actual handwashing practice, which has been found to be more accurate than other proxies such as self-reports of handwashing practices Household surveys and censuses provide data on the presence of handwashing facilities and soap and water in the home. The WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene (JMP) estimates access to handwashing facilities by fitting a regression line to all available national data points in each country. The JMP 2017 update methodology describes in more detail how data are combined to compute the basic handwashing facility indicator. () The presence of a handwashing station with soap and water does not guarantee that household members consistently wash hands at key times, but has been accepted as the most suitable proxy. However sufficient data were available to make estimates for 78 countries and for three out of eight SDG regions in 2019. Click on the button below to explore the data behind this indicator. Key asks To achieve SDG 6, governments must invest in their communities and bridge the economic and geographic divides to deliver the human rights to safe water, sanitation and hygiene. UNICEF has four key asks that encourage governments to: Reaffirm their commitment to improve access to basic water, sanitation and hygiene services.Strengthen partnerships with the national statistics offices towards the collection, analysis and use of disaggregated data and routinely measure progress towards equitable access to safe water, sanitation and hygiene.Report progress on national action.Ensure the continuity and quality of WASH services during the COVID-19 crisis and sustain affordable access to WASH products and services for the poorest and most vulnerable populations. Learn more about See more Sustainable Development Goals NO POVERTY ZERO HUNGER GOOD HEALTH AND WELL-BEING QUALITY EDUCATION GENDER EQUALITY CLEAN WATER AND SANITATION AFFORDABLE AND CLEAN ENERGY DECENT WORK AND ECONOMIC GROWTH REDUCED INEQUALITIES CLIMATE ACTION PEACE, JUSTICE AND STRONG INSTITUTIONS PARTNERSHIPS FOR THE GOALS
Coverage of SDG 6 is provided in partnership with share this Goal 6 - Clean Water & Sanitation Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all Targets 6.1By 2030, achieve universal and equitable access to safe and affordable drinking water for all6.2By 2030, achieve access to adequate and equitable sanitation and hygiene for all and end open defecation, paying special attention to the needs of women and girls and those in vulnerable situations6.3By 2030, improve water quality by reducing pollution, eliminating dumping and minimizing release of hazardous chemicals and materials, halving the proportion of untreated wastewater and substantially increasing recycling and safe reuse globally6.4By 2030, substantially increase water-use efficiency across all sectors and ensure sustainable withdrawals and supply of freshwater to address water scarcity and substantially reduce the number of people suffering from water scarcity6.5By 2030, implement integrated water resources management at all levels, including through transboundary cooperation as appropriate6.6By 2020, protect and restore water-related ecosystems, including mountains, forests, wetlands, rivers, aquifers and lakes6.aBy 2030, expand international cooperation and capacity-building support to developing countries in water- and sanitation-related activities and programmes, including water harvesting, desalination, water efficiency, wastewater treatment, recycling and reuse technologies6.bSupport and strengthen the participation of local communities in improving water and sanitation management SEE MORE news guest articles policy briefs Events More SDGs
Goal 6 – Clean water and sanitation The global goals for sustainable development Goal 6 | Clean water and sanitation Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all Parameters What should be achieved? By 2030, achieve universal and equitable access to safe and affordable drinking water for all. By 2030, achieve access to adequate and equitable sanitation and hygiene for all and end open defecation, paying special attention to the needs of women and girls and those in vulnerable situations. By 2030, improve water quality by reducing pollution, eliminating dumping and minimizing release of hazardous chemicals and materials, halving the proportion of untreated wastewater and substantially increasing recycling and safe reuse globally. By 2030, substantially increase water-use efficiency across all sectors and ensure sustainable withdrawals and supply of freshwater to address water scarcity and substantially reduce the number of people suffering from water scarcity. By 2030, implement integrated water resources management at all levels, including through transboundary cooperation as appropriate. By 2020, protect and restore water-related ecosystems, including mountains, forests, wetlands, rivers, aquifers and lakes. How should the goal be achieved? By 2030, expand international cooperation and capacity-building support to developing countries in water- and sanitation-related activities and programmes, including water harvesting, desalination, water efficiency, wastewater treatment, recycling and reuse technologies. Support and strengthen the participation of local communities in improving water and sanitation management. Projects of the German Federal Association for Sustainability, which address this goal In execution Currently no project In the planning Currently no project At the concept stage Currently no project Comments are closed.