11 Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable Related Topics Related Goals Related Goals Related Goals Related Goals Overview Targets and Indicators Target 11.1 By 2030, ensure access for all to adequate, safe and affordable housing and basic services and upgrade slums Indicators 11.1.1 Proportion of urban population living in slums, informal settlements or inadequate housing Target 11.2 By 2030, provide access to safe, affordable, accessible and sustainable transport systems for all, improving road safety, notably by expanding public transport, with special attention to the needs of those in vulnerable situations, women, children, persons with disabilities and older persons Indicators 11.2.1 Proportion of population that has convenient access to public transport, by sex, age and persons with disabilities Target 11.3 By 2030, enhance inclusive and sustainable urbanization and capacity for participatory, integrated and sustainable human settlement planning and management in all countries Indicators 11.3.1 Ratio of land consumption rate to population growth rate 11.3.2 Proportion of cities with a direct participation structure of civil society in urban planning and management that operate regularly and democratically Target 11.4 Strengthen efforts to protect and safeguard the world’s cultural and natural heritage Indicators 11.4.1 Total per capita expenditure on the preservation, protection and conservation of all cultural and natural heritage, by source of funding (public, private), type of heritage (cultural, natural) and level of government (national, regional, and local/municipal) Target 11.5 By 2030, significantly reduce the number of deaths and the number of people affected and substantially decrease the direct economic losses relative to global gross domestic product caused by disasters, including water-related disasters, with a focus on protecting the poor and people in vulnerable situations Indicators 11.5.1 Number of deaths, missing persons and directly affected persons attributed to disasters per 100,000 population 11.5.2 Direct economic loss attributed to disasters in relation to global domestic product (GDP) 11.5.3 (a) Damage to critical infrastructure and (b) number of disruptions to basic services, attributed to disasters Target 11.6 By 2030, reduce the adverse per capita environmental impact of cities, including by paying special attention to air quality and municipal and other waste management Indicators 11.6.1 Proportion of municipal solid waste collected and managed in controlled facilities out of total municipal waste generated, by cities 11.6.2 Annual mean levels of fine particulate matter (e.g. PM2.5 and PM10) in cities (population weighted) Target 11.7 By 2030, provide universal access to safe, inclusive and accessible, green and public spaces, in particular for women and children, older persons and persons with disabilities Indicators 11.7.1 Average share of the built-up area of cities that is open space for public use for all, by sex, age and persons with disabilities 11.7.2 Proportion of persons victim of physical or sexual harassment, by sex, age, disability status and place of occurrence, in the previous 12 months Target 11.a Support positive economic, social and environmental links between urban, peri-urban and rural areas by strengthening national and regional development planning Indicators 11.a.1 Number of countries that have national urban policies or regional development plans that (a) respond to population dynamics; (b) ensure balanced territorial development; and (c) increase local fiscal space Target 11.b By 2020, substantially increase the number of cities and human settlements adopting and implementing integrated policies and plans towards inclusion, resource efficiency, mitigation and adaptation to climate change, resilience to disasters, and develop and implement, in line with the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030, holistic disaster risk management at all levels Indicators 11.b.1 Number of countries that adopt and implement national disaster risk reduction strategies in line with the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030 11.b.2 Proportion of local governments that adopt and implement local disaster risk reduction strategies in line with national disaster risk reduction strategies Target 11.c Support least developed countries, including through financial and technical assistance, in building sustainable and resilient buildings utilizing local materials Indicators Progress and Info 2022 2021 2020 2019 2018 2017 2016 As epicentres of the COVID-19 crisis, many cities have suffered from insufficiencies in public health systems, inadequate basic services, a lack of well-developed and integrated public transport systems and inadequate open public spaces, as well as from the economic consequences of lockdowns. As a result, the pandemic is likely to further increase the number of slum dwellers. In order to improve the lives of over 1 billion slum dwellers, there is an urgent need to focus on policies for improving health, affordable housing, basic services, sustainable mobility and connectivity. Over the years, the number of slum dwellers has continued to grow and that number was over 1 billion in 2020. Slum dwellers are most prevalent in three regions, which are home to about 85 per cent of the world’s slum residents: Central and Southern Asia (359 million), Eastern and South-Eastern Asia (306 million) and sub-Saharan Africa (230 million). Data for 2020 from 1,510 cities around the world indicate that on average only about 37 per cent of their urban areas are served by public transport, measured as a walking distance of 500 m to low-capacity transport systems (such as buses and trams) and/or 1,000 m to high-capacity systems (such as trains and ferries). Given variations in population concentrations within those cities, this translates into only about 52 per cent of the world population having convenient access to public transport. In 2022, the global average municipal solid waste collection rate in cities is at 82 per cent and the global average rate of municipal solid waste management in controlled facilities in cities is at 55 per cent. The municipal solid waste collection rates in sub-Saharan Africa and Oceania are less than 60 per cent. Uncollected waste is the source of plastic pollution, greenhouse gas emissions and incubation for infections. Data for 2020 from 1,072 cities point to a poor distribution of open public spaces in most regions. In these cities, only about 38 per cent of urban areas are loca ted within a walking distance of 400 m to an open public space, which translates into only about 45 per cent of the global urban population having convenient access to those spaces. By March 2021, a total of 156 countries had developed national urban policies, with almost half (74) already in the implementation stage. A further breakdown shows that 40 per cent of the countries are in the early stages of developing their plans, while 12 per cent are monitoring and evaluating how well those plans are functioning. By the end of 2021, a total of 98 countries had reported having local governments with disaster risk reduction strategies, an increase from 51 countries in 2015. Source: For more information, please, check: Before the pandemic, cities had rising numbers of slum dwellers, worsening air pollution, minimal open public spaces and limited convenient access to public transport. The direct and indirect impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic are making it even more unlikely that this Goal will be achieved, with more people forced to live in slums, where quality of life is deteriorating and vulnerability increasing. The number of slum dwellers has continued to grow over the years, exceeding 1 billion in 2018. Slum dwellers are most prevalent in the three regions of Eastern and South-Eastern Asia (370 million), sub-Saharan Africa (238 million) and Central and Southern Asia (226 million). According to data from 2019 for 610 cities in 95 countries and territories, about half of the urban population has convenient access to public transport, defined as living within a walking distance of 500 metres to low-capacity transport systems, such as buses or trams, and 1,000 metres to high-capacity systems, such as trains and ferries. As a result of the COVID-19 response measures imposed in countries and territories throughout 2020, access to public transport in cities worldwide was significantly disrupted, from partial closures and reduced capacities to total closure of networks. Data collected for a sample of 911 cities from 114 countries and territories in 2020 indicate that between 1990 and 2019, spatial urbanization occurred at a much faster rate than population growth, and smaller cities were being urbanized more quickly than their larger counterparts. On average, all regions except sub-Saharan Africa and Eastern and South-Eastern Asia recorded a consistent increase in built-up area per capita, with the highest values in Australia and New Zealand. Data on a sample of 911 cities from 114 countries and territories indicate that the share of urban area allocated to streets and open public spaces averaged only about 16 per cent globally in 2020, well below the allocation recommended by United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat) of 30 per cent for streets and an additional 10 to 15 per cent for open public spaces. As of March 2021, 156 countries and territories have developed national urban policies, almost half of which are already at the implementation stage. Of these countries and territories, 38 per cent are in the early stages of plan development, while 13 per cent are monitoring and evaluating the performance of their plans. Source: Rapid urbanization has resulted in a growing number of slum dwellers, inadequate and overburdened infrastructure and services and worsening air pollution. The pandemic will hit the hardest the more than 1 billion slum dwellers worldwide, who suffer from a lack of adequate housing, no running water at home, shared toilets, few or no waste management systems, overcrowded public transport and limited access to formal health-care facilities. Many in that population work in the informal sector and are at high risk of losing their livelihood as cities shut down. Urgent response plans are needed to prepare for and respond to outbreaks in informal settlements and slums. The number of slum dwellers reached more than 1 billion in 2018, which represents 24 per cent of the urban population, up slightly from 23 per cent in 2014. The number of people living in urban slums is highest in Eastern and South-Eastern Asia (370 million), sub-Saharan Africa (238 million) and Central and Southern Asia (226 million). Access to adequate, reliable and safe public transport is a basic urban need. As shown in data collected in 2019 from a sample of 610 cities in 95 countries, only half of the world’s urban population had convenient access to public transport, defined as living within 500 metres’ walking distance from a low-capacity transport system (such as a bus stop) and within 1,000 metres of a high-capacity transport system (such as a railway or a ferry terminal). Data collected in 2019 from a sample of 755 cities in 95 countries show that, in the period 1990–2015, most urban areas recorded a general increase in the extent of built-up area (defined as the presence of buildings) per person. On average, all regions except sub-Saharan Africa and Eastern and South-Eastern Asia recorded a consistent increase in the built-up area per capita, with Australia and New Zealand recording the highest values. Based on 2019 data from 610 cities in 95 countries, the share of land allocated to streets and open spaces, which is critical to cities’ productivity and the social and health dimensions of their populations, averaged only about 16 per cent globally. Of those, streets accounted for about three times as much urban land as open public spaces, such as parks and riverfronts. The share of the population that could obtain access to open public spaces within 400 metres’ walking distance along a street network averaged 46.7 per cent. Source: Progress towards the Sustainable Development Goals, Report of the Secretary-General, Substantial progress has been made in reducing the proportion of the global urban population living in slums, though more than 1 billion people continue to live in such situations. Urgent action is needed to reverse the current situation, which sees the vast majority of urban residents breathing poor-quality air and having limited access to transport and open public spaces. With the areas occupied by cities growing faster than their populations, there are profound repercussions for sustainability. Between 1990 and 2016, the proportion of the global urban population living in slums fell from 46 to 23 per cent. This progress was largely offset by internal population growth and rural-urban migration. In 2016, just over 1 billion people lived in slums or informal settlements, with over half (589 million) living in East, South-East, Central and South Asia. The proportion of urban residents who have convenient access to public transport (defined as living within 500 m walking distance of a bus stop and within 1,000 m of a railway and/or ferry terminal) remains low, particularly in developing countries. Based on data from 227 cities from 78 countries in 2018, on average, 53 per cent of urban residents in all regions had convenient access to public transport, from a low of 18 per cent in sub-Saharan Africa to a high of 75 per cent in Australia and New Zealand. In some regions that have low access to public transport, informal transport modes are highly prevalent and in many cases provide reliable transport for the majority of urban populations. Globally, urban areas are expanding at a faster rate than their populations. Between 2000 and 2014, areas occupied by cities grew 1.28 times faster than their populations. Closely related to this trend is that the urban densities of cities have been declining, creating profound repercussions for environmental sustainability at the local, regional and global scale. Better management of urban growth will be crucial in order to guarantee sustainable urbanization. Globally, 2 billion people do not have access to waste collection services and 3 billion people lack access to controlled waste disposal facilities. With increasing urban populations and the existence of consumer-oriented economies amid rising income levels and rapid urbanization, it is estimated that the total waste generated in the world will double from nearly 2 billion tons in 2016 to about 4 billion tons by 2050. While from 2010 to 2018 the proportion of solid waste collected was about 81 per cent globally, in sub-Saharan Africa it was only 52 per cent. In 2016, 9 in 10 people living in urban areas still breathed air that did not meet the World Health Organization’s air quality guidelines value for particulate matter – that particulate matter 2.5 microns or less in size (PM2.5) not exceed an annual mean of 10 micrograms per m3 or a daily mean of 25 micrograms per m3 – and more than half of the world population experienced an increase in PM2.5 from 2010 to 2016. Most cities have struggled to ensure that their populations have convenient access to open public spaces (defined as spaces within 400 m walking distance of their residence). Based on data from 220 cities in 77 countries in 2018, only 21 per cent of the population had convenient access to open public spaces. However, these results do not necessarily mean that there is an inadequate share of land dedicated to open public spaces in these cities, but rather that their distribution across urban areas is uneven. National urban policies are policy strategies that specifically respond to the urbanization challenges of today. As of the beginning of 2019, 150 countries had developed such policies, and almost half are already implementing them. Source: Report of the Secretary-General, Many cities around the world are facing acute challenges in managing rapid urbanization— from ensuring adequate housing and infrastructure to support growing populations, to confronting the environmental impact of urban sprawl, to reducing vulnerability to disasters. Between 2000 and 2014, the proportion of the global urban population living in slums dropped from 28.4 per cent to 22.8 per cent. However, the actual number of people living in slums increased from 807 million to 883 million. Based on data collected for 214 cities/municipalities, about three quarters of municipal solid waste generated is collected. In 2016, 91 per cent of the urban population worldwide were breathing air that did not meet the World Health Organization air quality guidelines value for particulate matter (PM 2.5); more than half were exposed to air pollution levels at least 2.5 times higher than that safety standard. In 2016, an estimated 4.2 million people died as a result of high levels of ambient air pollution. From 1990 to 2013, almost 90 per cent of deaths attributed to internationally reported disasters occurred in low- and middle-income countries. Reported damage to housing attributed to disasters shows a statistically significant rise from 1990 onwards. Source: Report of the Secretary-General, In recent decades, the world has experienced unprecedented urban growth. In 2015, close to 4 billion people — 54 per cent of the world’s population — lived in cities and that number is projected to increase to about 5 billion people by 2030. Rapid urbanization has brought enormous challenges, including growing numbers of slum dwellers, increased air pollution, inadequate basic services and infrastructure, and unplanned urban sprawl, which also make cities more vulnerable to disasters. Better urban planning and management are needed to make the world’s urban spaces more inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable. As of May 2017, 149 countries were developing national-level urban policies. The proportion of the urban population that lives in developing country slums fell from 39 per cent in 2000 to 30 per cent in 2014. Despite some gains, the absolute number of urban residents who live in slums continued to grow, owing in part to accelerating urbanization, population growth and lack of appropriate land and housing policies. In 2014, an estimated 880 million urban residents lived in slum conditions, compared to 792 million urban residents in 2000. As more and more people move to urban areas, cities typically expand their geographic boundaries to accommodate new inhabitants. From 2000 to 2015, in all regions of the world, the expansion of urban land outpaced the growth of urban populations. As a result, cities are becoming less dense as they grow, with unplanned urban sprawl challenging more sustainable patterns of urban development. The safe removal and management of solid waste represents one of the most vital urban environmental services. Uncollected solid waste blocks drains, causes flooding and may lead to the spread of water-borne diseases. On the basis of data from cities in 101 countries from 2009 to 2013, 65 per cent of the urban population was served by municipal waste collection. Air pollution is a major environmental health risk. In 2014, 9 of 10 people who live in cities were breathing air that did not comply with the safety standard set by WHO. Source: Report of the Secretary-General, "Progress towards the Sustainable Development Goals", More than half the world’s population lives in cities. By 2030, it is projected that 6 out of 10 people will be urban dwellers. Despite numerous planning challenges, well-managed cities and other human settlements can be incubators for innovation and ingenuity and key drivers of sustainable development. However, as more people migrate to cities in search of a better life and urban populations grow, housing issues intensify. Already in 2014, 30 per cent of the urban population lived in slum-like conditions; in sub-Saharan Africa, the proportion was 55 per cent, the highest of any region. Globally, more than 880 million people were living in slums in 2014. This estimate does not include people in inadequate or unaffordable housing (defined as costing more than 30 per cent of total monthly household income). As population growth outpaces available land, cities expand far beyond their formal administrative boundaries. This urban sprawl can be seen in many cities around the world, and not only in developing regions. From 2000 to 2015, the ratio of the land consumption rate to the population growth rate in Eastern Asia and the Oceania was the highest in the world, with developed regions second. Other regions, such as South-Eastern Asia and Latin America and the Caribbean, showed a decrease in that indicator over the same time period. Unfortunately, a low value for this ratio is not necessarily an indication that urban dwellers are faring well, as this can indicate a prevalence of overcrowded slums. Unplanned urban sprawl undermines other determinants of sustainable development. For example, for every 10 per cent increase in sprawl, there is a 5.7 per cent increase in per capita carbon dioxide emissions and a 9.6 per cent increase in per capita hazardous pollution. This illustrates the important interlinkages across the goals and targets. Likewise, managing solid waste is often problematic in densely populated areas. In fact, in many developing regions, less than half of solid waste is safely disposed of. As per capita waste generation continues to rise, the collection and safe disposal of solid waste will continue to require serious attention. Urban air pollution also challenged cities around the world, causing illness and millions of premature deaths annually. In 2014, around half the global urban population was exposed to air pollution levels at least 2.5 times higher than maximum standards set by the World Health Organization. The quest for sustainable and coordinated urban development starts with national policies and regional development plans. As of 2015, 142 countries had a national urban policy in place or under development. Those countries are home to 75 per cent of the world’s urban population. Source: Report of the Secretary-General, "Progress towards the Sustainable Development Goals", EVENTS Related Goals Related Goals Related Goals Related Goals Publications News Related Goals Related Goals
Sustainable Cities and Communities The world is developing at an unprecedented scale. Over the next 20 years, urban population in developing countries will double to 4 billion, while the urbanized land area will triple. Rapid growth helps create new opportunities, but it has also brought serious social, economic, and environmental challenges.Today, 1 billion people live in urban slums, and 1.5 billion people live in countries affected by repeated cycles of violence. In the past decade, the number of people affected by natural disasters tripled to 2 billion. Low-income countries have accounted for only 9% of the disaster events but 48% of fatalities since 1980. The burden of disasters, conflict, crime, and violence falls disproportionately on the poor.Urban and rural communities around the world increasingly feel the urge to tackle these challenges and increase their resilience to poverty and inequality, social exclusion, violence and fragility, as well as climate change and disaster risks. Building sustainable communities—whether they are villages, cities, or countries and societies at large—will be critical to eliminating poverty and boosting shared prosperity.Specifically, the concept of “Sustainable Cities and Communities” of the World Bank’s Urban, Disaster Risk Management, Resilience and Land Global Practice (GPURL) includes four key dimensions:First, Sustainable Communities are environmentally sustainable in terms of cleanliness and Second, Sustainable communities are resilient to social, economic, and natural shocks. They are well prepared for natural disasters, which are increasing in intensity and frequency due to climate change.Third, Sustainable Communities are inclusive communities. They bring all dimensions of society and all groups of people—including the marginalized and vulnerable—into their markets, their services, and their development.And finally, Sustainable Communities are competitive communities that can stay productive and generate jobs for members of the community.Building inclusive, resilient, competitive and sustainable cities and communities is essential for achieving the Sustainable Development Goals by 2030, and eliminating extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity at the local, regional, and national levels.Join us in our efforts to build sustainable cities and communities worldwide! Read our and to stay updated. In building Sustainable Communities, the World Bank focuses on its work in four areas, led by the Bank’s Urban, Disaster Risk Management, Resilience and Land Global Practice (GPURL):: urban planning, services, and institutions: mainstreaming resilience in all dimensions of development and : territorial and rural developmentUrban Planning, Services, and Institutions – Urban Development:The World Bank’s work in urban development aims to through an urbanization process that is inclusive, resilient and low carbon, productive, and livable, contributing to the , implementation of the , as well as the World Bank’s goals to end extreme poverty and boost shared prosperity.The World Bank invests an average of $6 billion in urban development and resilience projects every year to help cities meet the critical demands of urbanization. The Bank’s Urban Development strategy focuses on three priorities:Financing the New Urban AgendaPromoting territorial developmentEnhancing urban resilience to climate change and disaster risksThe three priorities are translated into six business lines:Cities and economic growthUrban poverty and inclusionMunicipal infrastructure and servicesAffordable housing and landUrban management, finance, and governanceCities and urban environmentThe Bank is working in partnership with the private sector, governments, and civil society to build clean and efficient cities and communities that are resilient to natural disasters, and to create competitive economies that provide new kinds of jobs for people and ensure that everyone, especially the poorest, can benefit. For more information, see Mainstreaming Resilience – Disaster Risk Management:Disasters hurt the poor and vulnerable the most. From 1995 through 2014, 89% of storm-related fatalities were in lower-income countries, even though these countries experienced just 26% of storms. The impact of disasters will continue to grow as climate change increases the frequency and intensity of extreme weather events.Over the past decade, the World Bank has emerged as the global leader in disaster risk management (DRM), supporting client countries to assess exposure to hazards and address disaster risks. It provides technical and financial support for risk assessments, risk reduction, preparedness, financial protection, and resilient recovery and reconstruction. For more information, see Territorial and Rural Development – Land and Geospatial:Land is at the center of many development challenges. Estimates suggest that around 30% of land rights are registered or recorded worldwide. The World Bank is working to address land tenure insecurity through land administration projects, analytical work, and technical assistance. The World Bank actively works with countries and partners worldwide to ensure women’s equal access and secure rights to land and property. The World Bank also supports the land rights of smallholders and Indigenous Peoples, displaced people, and refugees.The World Bank is working on land tenure as well as land and geospatial infrastructure and systems in dozens of countries across the world, with an investment of approximately $1.5 billion in commitments, impacting millions of land holders in Africa, Asia, Eastern Europe and Central Asia, Latin America, and the Middle East and North Africa. The World Bank is increasingly working to open land and geospatial datasets for acceleration of growth. The Bank is also preparing a “Land 2030 Global Initiative” to enhance the commitment of countries and mobilize resources to achieve ambitious targets of securing land and property rights by 2030.For more information, see Click on the links below to learn more about the World Bank’s operational and analytical work in: The World Bank is actively working in partnership with the governments, civil society, academia, private sector, and others to build inclusive, resilient, competitive, and sustainable communities for all.As the partnership grows, the newsletter serves as a platform for development practitioners at the World Bank and around the world to stay informed and exchange ideas with their partners on the most pressing issues in global development, such as social development, urban development, disaster risk management and climate change, conflict and violence, and land governance. Urban Development RELATED
Today, 55% of the world’s population lives in cities. This is expected to rise to 70% by 2050, making urbanization one of the most significant trends of the 21st century. The global trend in urbanization has brought with it increased wealth as cities generate 80% of the word’s economy. Yet, when poorly planned and managed, urbanization generates inequalities and has already left a billion people living in slums with inadequate and often precarious living conditions. However, if steered and deployed correctly, urbanization can help the world overcome some of its major global challenges including poverty, inequality, environmental degradation, climate change, fragility and conflict. The 2030 Sustainable Development Agenda and the New Urban Agenda are two globally agreed agendas that that can guide the achievement of sustainable urbanization. The first provides a set of 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), within which two-thirds of its 234 indicators have urban components. The latter identifies the means through which sustainable urban development can be achieved, including roles of policy, legislation, inclusive governance, planning, municipal finance and sustainable infrastructure development. Since 2016, countries have been reporting on their SDG progress through Voluntary National Reviews (VNR) and more recently cities have started to prepare Voluntary Local Reviews (VLR). While there is widescale demand by cities to understand how they are performing on the achievement of SDGs, many cities worldwide also need support in translating performance data into strategic plans and to the development, financing and implementation of targeted actions that can accelerate the achievement of SDGs and improve wellbeing for all. Sustainable Development Goals Cities News and Stories Story 27 November 2020 UN-Habitat urges governments to Partner and Pledge for Sustainable Urbanization Story 4 December 2020 Member States pledge over USD 164 million for sustainable urbanization Press Release 2 March 2021 Voluntary Local Reviews are changing the way we think of SDG localization and the approach to the National Reviews Story 27 January 2021 Contributing to SDGs through Japanese low-cost and sustainable environmental technologies Press Release 1 February 2021 Friedrich-Ebert-Stifung Foundation (FES) to partner with UN-Habitat to advance SDG 11 in Africa Theory of Change If cities: Have clearly defined, evidence-based development targets for 2030, and understand their baseline status of achieving these targets through urban data tools; Know the actions and investments needed to achieve these targets; Have the support needed to build key capacities (data management, policy, planning, governance, financing); Are able to design projects that have significant SDG impact; Are able to blende sources of public and private finance to ensure impact at scale; Have a means to measure the contribution of these actions and investments towards their targets and can certify progress in achieving SDGs; and Are able to share their knowledge and experiences with similar cities, They will be equipped to address their challenges, improve the quality of life of their inhabitants and help drive the achievement of global sustainable development. Programme Components Visioning SDG Cities starts with a visioning process initiated by the city authority that brings together stakeholders from civil society, business communities, representative neighbourhoods etc. to identify challenges and development priorities for the city. These together with national development priorities may inform the city’s prioritisation of SDG achievement by 2030. They can be mapped on the SDG City Wheel (see below), where SDG targets are clustered around the three transformative commitments of the New Urban Agenda: Sustainable urban development for social inclusion and ending poverty; Sustainable and inclusive urban prosperity and opportunities for all; and, Environmentally sustainable and resilient urban development. Cities project their 2030 targets for SDG achievement The centre of the wheel marks 0% achievement and the rim marks 100% achievement. City specific planned achievement of SDG targets by 2030 can be mapped on this wheel and will provide a unique profile representing the city’s development aspiration. Baseline Assessment The SDG City Assessment and Measurement Tool will establish a baseline on the city’s current achievement of SDGs. This baseline will enable cities to undertake Voluntary Local Reviews. When mapped on the SDG City Wheel against the city’s target profile, gaps to be filled to reach these targets will be identified. Cities assess their current baseline on SDG achievement Strategic Planning Through an inclusive strategic planning process, the analysis of gaps will inform interventions needed to reach targets. These can be categorised into four baskets. Basket 1: Enablers; e.g. plans, governance set-up, regulations, municipal financing instruments, land management systems etc. Basket 2: Capacity gaps to be addressed; e.g. revenue collection and public financial management, solid waste management, land management, urban planning etc. Basket 3: Public Infrastructure; e.g. basic services – water, electricity, lighting, solid waste management, public transportation, public space, affordable housing, education and health facilities. Basket 4: Economic initiatives; e.g. tourism investments, business districts, industrial parks etc. Each intervention will be analysed to ascertain the extent to which it contributes to achieving the city’s SDG targets and its cost effectiveness. Cities define needed interventions and measure impact on SDG achievement Capacity Support and Technical Assistance SDG Cities will provide through UN-Habitat, UN and other partners support in building city capacities in key areas of policy, planning, governance and local financing. Each city will be encouraged to establish an urban lab that draws together local academics and practitioners. Using the city development strategy as a starting point, the lab will develop projects (Basket 3 and 4) that would contribute to implementing the cities’ development strategies and accelerating SDG achievement. By networking participating labs, global experiences sharing and advisory to cities can be made possible. Leveraging Finance for public infrastructure and economic initiatives SDG Cities will support the financial analysis of these impact projects and ascertain the most effective financing strategy - often blending public and private sources of finance for largescale impact. It will also identify financing risks and provide strategies through which risks may be mitigated. SDG Cities will match-make city investment packages with sources of finance through a City Investment Platform (CIP) that will link investor-ready initiatives to a broad range of financiers. SDG Cities Certification At the core of this flagship programme is an SDG Cities Certification process, which will provide a standard of excellence. This UN certificate of achievement will allow for a fair measurement and recognition of efforts by cities to accelerate SDG performance. Sharing knowledge for global impact The World Urban Forum and existing experience sharing platforms will provide participating cities with a means to share knowledge, experiences and tools. It will enable cities with similar development profiles to form communities of practice, and by harvesting knowledge and data, will allow UN-Habitat to developed targeted normative advice to specific groupings of cities. It will also provide a means to broaden the participation of cities worldwide in SDG Cities programme. The Programme expects to impact 900 cities with a total population of over 1 billion people by 2030. It aims to achieve this level of scale by structured knowledge sharing between cities and systematizing support through the following instruments: SDG Cities Measurement and Certification; Urban Labs; Impact Investment Simulation and City Investment Platform. The Offer The Offer for Cities SDG Cities will enable cities to accelerate addressing key challenges and realizing development priorities in line with the Sustainable Development Goals, and measure success in doing so. The Offer for Investors SDG Cities will ensure a continuous pipeline of assessed, de-risked, verifiable impact investment opportunities in cities worldwide, including in emerging and developing economies. The Offer for Global Development SDG Cities harnesses the potential of urbanization to accelerate the achievement of the global Sustainable Development Goals. Get Involved Going to scale requires as cities all over the world to commit to the achievement of SDGs supported by an ecosystem of global partners that can deliver various parts of the SDG Cities Value Chain Do your city want to advance the achievement of SDGs and so improve the wellbeing of people, and measure progress? Consultancy Companies: As global demand grows for SDG Cities, does your company want to provide expertise? In what areas? Academic Institutions and Data Management Companies: Does your company/ institution want or get involved in measuring city SDG performance? Investors: Interested tapping into a pipeline of verified, SDG worthy, impact investments? 5. Experts Dyfed Aubrey Inter-Regional Advisor Programme Development Branch, Global Solutions Division
share this Goal 11 - Sustainable Cities & Communities Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable Targets 11.1By 2030, ensure access for all to adequate, safe and affordable housing and basic services and upgrade slums11.2By 2030, provide access to safe, affordable, accessible and sustainable transport systems for all, improving road safety, notably by expanding public transport, with special attention to the needs of those in vulnerable situations, women, children, persons with disabilities and older persons11.3By 2030, enhance inclusive and sustainable urbanization and capacity for participatory, integrated and sustainable human settlement planning and management in all countries11.4Strengthen efforts to protect and safeguard the world’s cultural and natural heritage11.5By 2030, significantly reduce the number of deaths and the number of people affected and substantially decrease the direct economic losses relative to global gross domestic product caused by disasters, including water-related disasters, with a focus on protecting the poor and people in vulnerable situations11.6By 2030, reduce the adverse per capita environmental impact of cities, including by paying special attention to air quality and municipal and other waste management11.7By 2030, provide universal access to safe, inclusive and accessible, green and public spaces, in particular for women and children, older persons and persons with disabilities11.aSupport positive economic, social and environmental links between urban, peri-urban and rural areas by strengthening national and regional development planning11.bBy 2020, substantially increase the number of cities and human settlements adopting and implementing integrated policies and plans towards inclusion, resource efficiency, mitigation and adaptation to climate change, resilience to disasters, and develop and implement, in line with the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030, holistic disaster risk management at all levels11.cSupport least developed countries, including through financial and technical assistance, in building sustainable and resilient buildings utilizing local materials SEE MORE news guest articles policy briefs Events More SDGs
Make cities inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable About half of humanity live in cities today. By 2050, two-thirds of the global population will be urban dwellers. Rapid urban growth in the developing world is placing enormous demands on food systems. Cities expand into fertile land increasing the food needs of urban families competing for natural resources such as land and water. Fluctuating food prices hard hit urban consumers who are almost exclusively dependent on food purchases. Variations in food prices and incomes translate into diminished purchasing power and rising rates of food insecurity, compromising dietary quantity and quality. FAO promotes a holistic multi-stakeholder approach to address urban resilience and is committed to support, countries and their local governments, and other city/regional/national stakeholders in building multi-level governance and institutional capacities and forging partnerships necessary to deliver more coherent and inclusive food security and nutrition policies and leverage investments. Latest stories 31/10/2022 29/10/2021 Find out more FAO Publications These guidelines are the result a consultative process that involved a large number of practitioners from both developed and developing countries. Two meetings were held in Glasgow and Delhi and a tentative outline was agreed upon. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development endorsed in September 2015 confirmed the importance of achieving food security dedicating a Sustainable Development Goal (SDG2). This report looks at progress made in "growing greener cities" in Latin America and the Caribbean – cities in which urban and peri-urban agriculture is recognized by public policy Share this page
Goal 11 – Sustainable cities and communities The global goals for sustainable development Goal 11 | Sustainable cities and communities Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable Parameters What should be achieved? By 2030, ensure access for all to adequate, safe and affordable housing and basic services and upgrade slums. By 2030, provide access to safe, affordable, accessible and sustainable transport systems for all, improving road safety, notably by expanding public transport, with special attention to the needs of those in vulnerable situations, women, children, persons with disabilities and older persons. By 2030, enhance inclusive and sustainable urbanization and capacity for participatory, integrated and sustainable human settlement planning and management in all countries. Strengthen efforts to protect and safeguard the world’s cultural and natural heritage. By 2030, significantly reduce the number of deaths and the number of people affected and substantially decrease the direct economic losses relative to global gross domestic product caused by disasters, including water-related disasters, with a focus on protecting the poor and people in vulnerable situations. By 2030, reduce the adverse per capita environmental impact of cities, including by paying special attention to air quality and municipal and other waste management. By 2030, provide universal access to safe, inclusive and accessible, green and public spaces, in particular for women and children, older persons and persons with disabilities. How should the goal be achieved? Support positive economic, social and environmental links between urban, per-urban and rural areas by strengthening national and regional development planning. By 2020, substantially increase the number of cities and human settlements adopting and implementing integrated policies and plans towards inclusion, resource efficiency, mitigation and adaptation to climate change, resilience to disasters, and develop and implement, in line with the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030, holistic disaster risk management at all levels. Support least developed countries, including through financial and technical assistance, in building sustainable and resilient buildings utilizing local materials. Projects of the German Federal Association for Sustainability, which address this goal In execution Currently no project In the planning Currently no project At the concept stage Currently no project Comments are closed.