
 Here is a draft New York Times-style article on SDG 13 (Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts):

U.N. Calls for Accelerated Action on SDG 13 as Climate Impacts Worsen

As the impacts of climate change intensify around the globe, the United Nations is urging countries to take bolder steps to achieve Sustainable Development Goal 13: urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts. In his latest progress report, U.N. Secretary-General Antonio Guterres warned that the world is not on track to meet the targets of SDG 13 and limit global warming to well below 2 degrees Celsius.  

“The climate crisis continues to accelerate faster than our efforts to address it,” Mr. Guterres said. “We need a total transformation of our global energy economy, as well as major changes in agriculture, transportation, infrastructure and other sectors to make them sustainable and green.” Achieving this transformation will require significantly higher ambitions, particularly among the largest emitters and wealthiest nations that have contributed the most to global climate change.

Though renewable energy and new technologies provide hope, annual emissions of heat-trapping gases like carbon dioxide continue to rise. The impacts, from record wildfires to more intense hurricanes, are costing lives and hundreds of billions of dollars per year, according to a recent report from the U.N. Development Programme. The poorest nations remain those hardest hit, even though they have contributed little to climate change.

To get the world back on track to meet the Paris Agreement and SDG 13, experts say countries must strengthen their commitments under the agreement and increase funding for both climate change mitigation and adaptation in developing nations. Developed countries have already pledged $100 billion per year in climate finance, but have not yet fulfilled that commitment. The Secretary-General is also calling for an end to fossil fuel subsidies, transitioning energy and transportation systems to renewable energy, and "climate-proofing" infrastructure. 

Continued global cooperation and ambitious actions at the national and local levels are urgently needed to address "the defining issue of our time," said Inger Andersen, head of the U.N. Environment Programme. "We have a long way to go to make SDG 13 a reality, but it can be done if we come together around solutions, listen to science, and show leadership." The next round of climate talks will be held in November, offering an opportunity for world leaders to step up to this challenge and put Earth on a more sustainable path.


 Here is a draft newspaper article in the style of the Financial Times on SDG 13 (Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts):

Urgent Action Needed to Combat Climate Change, UN Warns 

The United Nations has issued an urgent call for accelerated action to combat the existential threat of climate change and limit global warming to 1.5°C to avoid catastrophic impacts. In his latest progress report on the Sustainable Development Goals, the UN Secretary-General warned that the world is severely off-track to meet targets set by the 2015 Paris Agreement andSDG 13 on climate action. At current rates of greenhouse gas emissions and national climate commitments, temperature rise could exceed 3°C this century.

"The science is clear: we need to cut emissions by at least half from 2010 levels over the next decade to have any chance of reaching net-zero emissions by 2050 and limiting warming to 1.5°C," the Secretary-General said. However, according to the UN Environment Programme's latest Emissions Gap Report, countries' current climate pledges would lead to a rise of at least 2.5°C in temperature. This would lead to irreversible changes including sea-level rise, more extreme weather events, water shortages, and damage to ecosystems.

Achieving SDG 13 will require a rapid transition away from fossil fuels to clean energy, sustainable agriculture and land use, and climate-resilient infrastructure. Many of the tools and technologies to facilitate this transition already exist. But stronger political will and commitments are urgently needed to shift public and private financial flows to low-carbon investments. Developed countries must meet their pledge to mobilize $100 billion a year in climate finance for developing countries. 

"The climate crisis threatens all dimensions of sustainable development articulated in the 2030 Agenda," said the head of UN DESA. "Urgent and concerted action to curb emissions and build resilience is needed to avoid reversal of decades of progress in poverty reduction and development." With only 10 years left to achieve the SDGs, the Secretary-General called for leadership from all sectors of society to accelerate climate action and for countries to submit stronger national climate plans by 2020. Our planet's future hangs in the balance, and the time for incremental changes is over. Transformative action needs to start right now.


 Here is a draft long-form newspaper article in the style of USA Today on SDG 13 (Climate Action):

Climate Change: An Urgent Call for Action

Climate change is happening, and it's happening fast. According to the latest report from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), global warming has already reached about 1 degree Celsius above pre-industrial levels, and is rising at 0.2 degrees Celsius per decade. At this rate, the planet is likely to reach the critical threshold of 1.5 degrees Celsius of warming between 2030 and 2052. 

Urgent action is needed to curb greenhouse gas emissions and build resilience against the impacts of climate change that can no longer be avoided. That is the message of Sustainable Development Goal 13 (SDG 13) on Climate Action, adopted by all 193 member states of the United Nations in 2015. SDG 13 calls for "strengthening resilience and adaptive capacity to climate-related hazards and natural disasters in all countries" and "improving education, awareness-raising and human and institutional capacity on climate change mitigation, adaptation, impact reduction and early warning."

According to the UN's latest SDG progress report, greenhouse gas emissions continue to rise, natural disasters are becoming more extreme, sea levels are rising, and climate change is already undermining food security and efforts to end poverty in many parts of the world. Urgent steps must be taken to transition to renewable energy, build sustainable infrastructure, and make societies and economies more resilient in the face of climate impacts. Developing countries in particular need financial and technical support. 

On the bright side, the cost of renewable energy technologies like solar and wind has declined dramatically in recent years. More and more governments, cities and businesses are pledging to cut emissions and go carbon neutral. There is growing public awareness and demand for climate action around the world. 

Still, much more ambition is needed to meet the goals of the Paris Agreement and limit global warming to 1.5 degrees Celsius. Emissions need to decline by about 45% from 2010 levels by 2030, reaching net zero around 2050. According to the UN, to achieve SDG 13, governments should implement policy instruments like taxes and incentives to drive massive investments in low-carbon and climate-resilient infrastructure. Everyone - governments, businesses and individuals - must do their part to mitigate and adapt to climate change. Our planet depends on it.

The next decade is critical. With climate change, we have a choice: take urgent action now or face catastrophic consequences later. As UN Secretary-General Antonio Guterres said, "the climate emergency is a race we are losing, but it is a race we can win." SDG 13 and the Paris Agreement have set the world on the right track. Now we must summon the political will to step up action on climate change before it is too late. Our planet depends on the choices we make today.


 Here is a draft of a long-form article on SDG 13 (Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts) in the style of Bloomberg:

The World is Not on Track to Mitigate the Threat of Climate Change According to UN Leaders 

By [Assistant Name], Bloomberg

UN Secretary-General Antonio Guterres yesterday released the 2020 annual report on progress towards the Sustainable Development Goals, warning that the world is significantly off course to achieve SDG 13, which calls for the global community to take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts. 

"The world is not on track to mitigate and adapt to climate change," said Liu Zhenmin, Under-Secretary-General for Economic and Social Affairs. "We need urgent action on all fronts." At the current rate of global greenhouse gas emissions, the world is on pace to increase average temperatures by 3 to 5 degrees Celsius or more by the end of this century, far surpassing the Paris Agreement goals.

According to the UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs, global emissions continue to rise, and 19 of the 20 warmest years in recorded history have occurred in the past two decades. The impacts are already apparent around the world through increases in extreme weather events, sea level rise, melting permafrost, and changes in weather patterns. These climate change effects pose an existential threat to humanity if drastic action is not taken.

In order to achieve SDG 13, the world must cut emissions by 45% from 2010 levels by 2030 and reach net zero emissions by 2050 to limit warming to 1.5 degrees Celsius. But current national climate commitments under the Paris Agreement would lead to a disastrous 3 degree Celsius of warming, according to the latest analysis from the UNDP and UNFCCC. 

"The recent rash of fires, floods, droughts and cyclones are not natural disasters, they are man-made disasters," said Guterres. "They are a consequence of climate change and the result of human activity." The Secretary-General has called for an end to fossil fuel subsidies, a new model for taxation that incorporates carbon pricing, a shift in investments to low-carbon and renewable energy, and for countries to submit revised national climate plans that are aligned with the 1.5 degree goal.

(Continued...)


 Here is a draft of a long-form newspaper article in the style of the Wall Street Journal on SDG 13 (Climate Action):

U.N. Sounds Alarm on Faltering Progress Towards Curbing Climate Change  

By Your Assistant

The United Nations warned this week that the world is falling dangerously behind in efforts to mitigate and adapt to climate change, threatening the achievement of Sustainable Development Goal 13 on climate action. 

In a grim report, the U.N. Department of Economic and Social Affairs said greenhouse gas emissions worldwide continued to rise in 2019 for the third year in a row, reaching a record high of 52.4 gigatonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent. The increases came despite growing public outcry over the risks of climate change, mass protests, and pledges by governments and businesses to transition to more sustainable energy and transportation systems.

“We are still not doing nearly enough to meet the Paris Agreement targets and prevent irreversible impacts of climate change,” said Li Dezhu, Director of the Division for Sustainable Development Goals in U.N. DESA. “The accelerating impacts of climate change represent an existential threat that must be urgently addressed through far more ambitious action than we have seen to date.”  

The sobering assessment comes five years after the adoption of the 17 Sustainable Development Goals, including SDG 13 which calls for “urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts.” Under that goal, countries agreed to implement the landmark Paris climate agreement to limit global temperature rise to 2 degrees Celsius while aiming for 1.5 degrees, but according to the latest U.N. Emissions Gap report, the world is on track for a temperature rise of 3 degrees Celsius by the end of the century even if all current national pledges are met. 

Achieving the Paris targets would require slashing emissions by 7.6% per year over the next decade, but emissions have remained at record highs since SDG 13 was adopted in 2015. The five U.N. regional commissions warned that climate impacts are already undermining progress on all dimensions of sustainable development in their respective regions.

The lags in progress highlight the immense scale of the challenge in transitioning the global economy away from fossil fuels to more sustainable sources of energy. But U.N. officials said climate action remains a “solvable problem” if governments, businesses and individuals dramatically accelerate and scale up their efforts starting this year. With only 10 years left to achieve the SDGs, the coming decade will be critical to mobilizing the global response needed to curb the worst effects of climate change and safeguard the planet for future generations.


 Here is a draft Op-Ed in the style of Nicholas Kristof on Sustainable Development Goal 13 (Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts):

The Greatest Threat of Our Time

By Your Assistant

Climate change is the challenge of our generation. It exacerbates poverty, causes natural disasters, and fuels instability around the globe. According to the latest UN report, we have just 12 years to dramatically cut greenhouse gas emissions to avoid catastrophic consequences. Despite the urgency, we are not doing nearly enough. 

SDG 13 calls on all countries to take action on climate change, but the commitments in the Paris Agreement are not enough. Global temperatures have already increased 1 degree C from pre-industrial levels, and the impacts are apparent across every continent. Rising seas threaten coastal cities and island nations. Changing weather patterns lead to more frequent or intense droughts, heatwaves, and storms. The poorest and most vulnerable populations suffer the most. 

To address this crisis, we must transition from fossil fuels to renewable energy, invest in green infrastructure and transportation systems, make our buildings and appliances more efficient, reduce waste, and change behaviors and policies across sectors. Many solutions already exist, and renewable energy is more affordable than ever. But political will and funding lag behind.

According to the UN, climate adaptation and green investments in developing countries will require $70 billion per year. But rich nations have failed to meet their pledge to provide $100 billion a year in climate finance for developing countries by 2020. This is self-defeating since the impacts of climate change know no borders. 

All of us have a role to play as citizens, consumers, and community members. We can eat less meat, reduce single-use plastics, call on companies and politicians to take bolder action, and make climate change a priority in how we vote and invest. Together, we have the power to transform our society and ensure a livable climate for future generations. But the next decade is crucial. There is no time to waste - our planet depends on the actions we take today. The threat is immense, but so is the opportunity if we rise to meet this moment. Our children's children will judge us for how we respond. We must act now to secure their future on this shared home we call Earth.


 Here is a draft Op-ed in the style of Paul Krugman on SDG 13 (Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts):

The planet is in crisis. The impacts of climate change are already apparent across the globe through increased temperatures, changes in weather patterns, rising sea levels, and more frequent or intense extreme weather events. According to the latest IPCC report, we have only 12 years left to limit climate change to 1.5°C to avoid catastrophic consequences. Urgent action is needed by all countries to transition to greener economies and societies.  

Despite the scale of this challenge, we are failing to make progress fast enough. The latest Emissions Gap Report from UN Environment shows that current national pledges under the Paris Agreement would lead to a global temperature rise of 3°C by 2100. This is simply unacceptable and will lead to irreversible damage to ecosystems, displace hundreds of millions of people, and cause tremendous economic losses. We need to at least triple our current level of ambition for 2030.

A rapid transition to renewable energy and energy efficiency is critical. While the costs of solar and wind have declined rapidly, we need major investments in grid infrastructure and storage solutions to scale up deployment. Developed countries need to make good on their promise to mobilize $100 billion per year in climate finance for developing countries to support mitigation and adaptation. Technologies like carbon capture and storage must be deployed at massive scale. Deforestation needs to be halted and afforestation scaled up. Sustainable agricultural practices should be incentivized. 

But technology and finance are not enough. We need a fundamental shift in mindsets and policies. Governments need to put a price on carbon, end fossil fuel subsidies, and shift taxation and regulation to favor green activities.  Cities need better land use and transport planning. Investors should integrate climate risks into decision making. The private sector must set science-based targets and innovate for sustainability. Individuals must change behaviors and consumption patterns.

Only a collective global effort across governments, business, investors and individuals can limit climate change to 1.5°C. Incremental changes will not be enough. We need a rapid and far-reaching transformation of how we live, work, produce, consume and govern our economies and societies. The next decade is crucial. Urgent action must be taken now to address this crisis and chart a more sustainable path for our planet. Our future depends on it.


 Here is a draft Op-Ed on SDG 13 (Climate Action) in the style of Mark Whitehouse:

The Clock is Ticking on Climate Change 

By the Assistant

As the world continues its steady march toward a climate catastrophe, SDG 13 on climate action is more critical than ever. According to the latest UN reports, the average global temperature is on pace to increase by 3 degrees Celsius this century, far exceeding the target of limiting warming to 1.5C set by the Paris Agreement. Sea levels have risen 8 inches since 1900 and are projected to rise 1 to 4 feet by 2100, threatening coastal cities and islands. Extreme weather events are becoming more severe and more frequent. 2019 was the second hottest year on record and the end of the hottest decade ever recorded.

Despite the stark warnings from scientists, progress on climate change remains dangerously slow. Carbon dioxide levels continue to climb, natural disasters proliferate, and many of the poorest and most vulnerable countries face existential threats. The world remains woefully unprepared for the consequences of climate change, with adaptation efforts receiving only a tiny fraction of the funding and attention given to mitigation. At this point, some level of climate change is inevitable and irreversible, but the difference between 2C of warming and 3C is measured in vast amounts of human suffering.  

To have any hope of achieving SDG 13, countries must dramatically accelerate action and make up for lost time. This will require transitioning from fossil fuels to renewable energy with a speed and scale unprecedented in human history. It will require overhauling transportation systems, revolutionizing agricultural practices, and retrofitting cities. It will require massive investments in new technologies and adaptation efforts to protect people from worsening disasters. It will require cooperation on a global scale.

Time is running out to avoid a full-blown climate crisis. But with political will and a shared sense of urgency, achieving SDG 13 is still possible. The next decade will be pivotal in determining whether humanity rises to meet this existential challenge or continues down the treacherous path of complacency and delay. Our planet's future hangs in the balance. The clock is ticking. We must act now.


 Here is a draft article on SDG 13 (climate action) in the style of The Economist:

Tackling the climate crisis: Progress and perils on the road to 2030 

As the world hurtles towards dangerous climate change, progress on SDG 13, which aims to “take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts”, is mixed. According to the latest UN assessment, the world is not on track to meet the goal of limiting global warming to 1.5°C. The past four years were the hottest on record, and extreme weather events are becoming more severe and frequent. However, promising strides are also being made.  

More countries are adopting laws, policies and plans aligned with the Paris Agreement. At least 164 parties to the Agreement have submitted revised national climate plans, and over 70% of the world's GDP is now covered by commitments to net zero emissions. The renewable energy sector is growing quickly, with solar and wind power getting cheaper. Innovations in areas like battery storage, hydrogen and carbon capture are gaining ground. 

Yet far more needs to be done to change course. The UN warns that countries' current climate plans put the world on track for a temperature rise of 3.2°C this century. To achieve the 1.5°C goal, global emissions must decline by 7.6% per year until 2030. However, emissions are still rising. The gap between pledged action and what is needed is alarming.

Finance is a major stumbling block. Developed countries have failed to meet their promise to mobilize $100bn a year in climate finance for poorer nations. While investment in green energy is rising sharply, more money still flows into fossil fuels. Markets also remain distorted by nearly $500bn a year in subsidies for coal, oil and gas.

Changing course will require a far more concerted global effort, especially by major emitters, to enact policies, scale up renewable energy, improve storage technology, reimagine land use and transportation, and green finance. Time is running out to build the sustainable future envisaged in the 2030 Agenda. With climate impacts intensifying yearly, the world must accelerate its collective action over this decisive decade. Nothing less than a rapid and far-reaching transformation of economies and societies will ensure we meet the promise of SDG 13 to secure a liveable planet for future generations. Overall progress is insufficient but not too late. With political will, more ambitious targets and policies, and technological advances, achieving SDG 13 remains possible, but the window for action is closing fast. The coming years will be pivotal in tackling this urgent challenge.


 Here is a draft long-form article in the style of Harvard Business Review on Sustainable Development Goal 13 (Climate Action):

The Urgent Business of Climate Change: How Companies Can Drive Action on SDG 13  

Climate change is an existential crisis that threatens our planet and society. According to the latest IPCC reports, we have only 12 years to limit warming to 1.5°C to avoid catastrophic consequences. Despite this urgency, global progress on climate action remains slow. Achieving the targets of the Paris Agreement and Sustainable Development Goal 13 (SDG 13) on climate action will require a rapid and far-reaching transition across all sectors.  

Businesses have a critical role to play in accelerating climate action and achieving SDG 13. Companies contribute significantly to greenhouse gas emissions through their operations and value chains, so changing business practices can have an outsized impact. At the same time, the transition to a low-carbon economy represents an unprecedented business opportunity. The low-carbon sector is growing rapidly, and companies that transform their business models now will be best placed to thrive.

However, many companies struggle in the face of this complex challenge. According to the UN Global Compact, two-thirds of businesses say they do not feel equipped to adapt to and mitigate the effects of climate change. Companies face obstacles including lack of knowledge, short-term thinking, and difficulties in implementation. With the deadline for achieving SDG 13 fast approaching, businesses cannot afford inaction. Companies must make ambitious commitments to reduce emissions, set science-based targets, transition to renewable energy, and drive climate innovation. But they cannot stop there—they must follow through with comprehensive action across their operations and value chains.  

At the policy level, governments and multilateral organizations should support business action on SDG 13 by providing incentives for low-carbon investments, eliminating fossil fuel subsidies, and enacting strong climate legislation. Coordinated policy frameworks are needed to accelerate the transition. Public-private partnerships also have a key role to play in scaling climate solutions, especially in developing countries.  

Climate change is an issue that affects us all, so achieving SDG 13 will require an unprecedented level of collaboration. Together, policymakers, businesses, investors and civil society can drive the rapid decarbonization needed to secure a sustainable future for our planet. But businesses must act now to transform their practices and harness the opportunity of a low-carbon economy. There is no time to waste in the fight against climate change. Our planet depends on it.


 Here is a draft long article in the style of Time Magazine on SDG 13 (Climate Action):

The Race Against Time: Can We Achieve SDG 13 on Climate Change? 

The impacts of climate change are already apparent across the globe, from more extreme weather events to rising sea levels threatening coastal communities. According to the latest IPCC report, the world has already warmed about 1 degree Celsius from pre-industrial levels, and is on track to warm up to 5 degrees Celsius by 2100 if current emission trends continue. Such temperature increases would have catastrophic effects, including changes to weather patterns that threaten food production and an increase in climate-related disasters.  

To avoid the most severe consequences of climate change, nearly every country in the world pledged under the Paris Agreement to limit global warming to well below 2 degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels, with an aim of 1.5 degrees Celsius. Achieving this goal is the aim of Sustainable Development Goal 13: Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts. But according to the UN's latest SDG progress report, the world is not on track to meet SDG 13 and is at risk of missing the targets of the Paris Agreement.  

A key part of SDG 13 is reducing greenhouse gas emissions, including carbon dioxide from the burning of fossil fuels. While emissions have started to decline in some developed countries, overall emissions continue to increase globally at a rate of 1.3% per year. To limit warming to 1.5°C, global emissions need to be reduced by about half from 2010 levels by 2030. Many experts worry this is becoming increasingly unrealistic without a massive global effort.

Transitioning energy and transportation systems to renewable, low-carbon options is critical. The renewable energy sector has grown rapidly, and costs for solar and wind energy have plunged in recent years. But the deployment of renewables needs to accelerate to about six times the current rate to meet climate targets, according to the UN. Sustainable transportation options like electric vehicles are also expanding quickly but still make up only a tiny fraction of the total vehicle fleet.   

Raising climate change ambition also requires action from states and non-state actors, including businesses and


 Here is a draft Forbes-style article on Sustainable Development Goal 13 (Climate Action):

The Clock is Ticking: Urgent Action Needed on SDG 13  

By Your AI Assistant

There is little doubt that climate change is an existential threat facing our world today. As the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change has warned, we have only 12 years left to limit climate change catastrophe. Achieving SDG 13, which focuses on urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts, is absolutely critical to the future of our planet.

SDG 13 aims to “take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts.” This far-reaching goal includes targets to strengthen resilience and adaptive capacity to climate-related hazards and natural disasters, integrate climate change measures into national policies and planning, and improve education and human/institutional capacity on climate change mitigation, adaptation, impact reduction and early warning. 

Progress on SDG 13 is worryingly slow according to the UN Secretary-General’s latest SDG progress report. While climate change is happening even faster than the world’s top scientists predicted, climate ambition and action remain dangerously off track. Global temperatures have already risen 1 degree Celsius, and we are not on pace to limit warming to 1.5°C or well below 2°C as called for in the Paris Agreement. Urgent and unprecedented changes are needed to realign the world with the goals of the Paris Agreement and SDG 13.

The good news is that the technologies and tools to tackle climate change already largely exist, and the transition to renewable energy and greener economies is creating new industries and jobs. What is missing is political will and momentum. Governments, businesses and individuals must work together to raise climate ambition, invest in green growth and adaptation, and make real policy, technology and behavioral changes to achieve zero net emissions by 2050. The emissions gap and adaptation gap must be closed quickly through enhanced national climate plans and policies, as well as accelerated action by cities, regions, investors, and businesses.  Developed countries also need to make good on their promise to channel $100 billion a year by 2020 to less wealthy nations for climate mitigation and adaptation.

In summary, achieving SDG 13 is the challenge of our lifetime. Nothing short of a massive global movement and unprecedented cooperation can make it possible...Time is running out, but together we can rise to the challenge and secure a sustainable future for our planet. The clock is ticking, so we need climate action now.


 Here is a draft long-form article on Sustainable Development Goal 13 (Climate Action) in the style of Newsweek:

The Clock is Ticking: Can the World Rise to the Challenge of Climate Change?

By the Assistant 

Climate change is an existential threat facing humanity today. The impacts of rising global temperatures, changing weather patterns, and sea level rise are already being felt around the world through more frequent and intense extreme weather events, droughts, heat waves, and other disruptions. According to the latest report from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, the world has only 12 years to make massive reductions in greenhouse gas emissions to avoid catastrophic climate change impacts.  

In 2015, world leaders came together to adopt the Paris Agreement and 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) to put the planet on a sustainable path by 2030. SDG 13 specifically calls on countries to “take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts.” But four years on, not enough progress has been made. According to the UN Secretary-General’s latest SDG progress report, “Climate change is occurring at a faster rate than expected and its effects are clearly felt worldwide.” Global emissions continue to rise, temperatures continue to increase, and climate impacts continue to worsen. 

Urgent action is needed to bend the curve of emissions downwards immediately to have any hope of meeting the Paris Agreement’s goal of limiting warming to 1.5°C. The UN’s climate change conference COP26 in 2020 is a pivotal moment for countries to dramatically strengthen their climate pledges and action. But national governments alone cannot solve this problem. Cities, businesses, investors and individuals must also step up to transition from fossil fuels to renewable energy, move to more sustainable modes of transport, adopt energy efficiency measures, and make climate-friendly lifestyle changes.  

There are some bright spots of progress around the world on SDG 13 worth noting. Renewable energy is now the cheapest source of new power generation in most parts of the world. Global investment in green energy continues to rise, reaching $288.9 billion in 2018. Many cities and regions are transitioning to 100% renewable energy and achieving major cuts in emissions. People around the world, especially youth, are demanding urgent climate action through school strikes and other grassroots movements.  

However, overall progress remains far too slow. The coming years are critical to ensure the world limits warming to 1.5°C. Success or failure depends on decisions made today. Urgent, concerted action must be taken across governments, businesses and individuals to transition from fossil fuels to renewable energy, move to more sustainable modes of transport, adopt energy efficiency measures, and make climate-friendly lifestyle changes. The clock is ticking. Our planet’s future hangs in the balance. The time for action is now. Together, we must rise to overcome the greatest challenge of our time.


 Here is a draft long-form article on Sustainable Development Goal 13 (Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts) in the style of the Journal of International Development:

Combating Climate Change: Progress and Challenges on SDG 13  

Climate change is an existential threat facing all nations and people. Rising global temperatures are already leading to more extreme weather events, with devastating effects including increased frequency and severity of heat waves, droughts, hurricanes, and floods. The impacts of climate change exacerbate global challenges related to poverty, inequality, hunger, and conflict. Urgent action is needed to mitigate and adapt to climate change to support sustainable development and protect future generations.  

Sustainable Development Goal 13 aims to mobilize the global community around this urgent need, calling on all countries to “Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts.” Under SDG 13, countries have committed to strengthening resilience and adaptive capacity to climate-related hazards and natural disasters; integrating climate change measures into national policies, strategies and planning; and improving education, awareness-raising and human and institutional capacity on climate change mitigation, adaptation, impact reduction and early warning.  

There has been some progress on combating climate change, but not at the pace or scale required. The Paris Agreement entered into force in 2016, with ambitious goals to limit global warming to well below 2°C. As of early 2019, 185 parties had ratified the agreement. Countries have been submitting Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (INDCs) detailing their climate actions and targets. However, current INDCs are not sufficient to limit warming to safe levels. The world remains off-track to achieve the goals of the Paris Agreement according to the latest Emissions Gap Report from UNEP.  

Greater urgency, concrete policies, scaled up financing and accelerated action on all fronts are needed to address this existential threat in line with SDG 13. Key recommendations for countries and the international community include: 
•Revise INDCs to more ambitious targets in advance of COP26 to close the emissions gap.  
•Integrate climate change into COVID-19 economic recovery plans and policies.  
•Increase investment in green infrastructure, renewable energy, and climate-smart agriculture.  
•Scale up funding for adaptation and disaster risk reduction, especially for vulnerable countries.  
•Strengthen climate education and empower youth as change agents.  
 • Improve national policy, planning and legal frameworks for climate governance and action.

In conclusion, climate change is an unprecedented global challenge that threatens lives and livelihoods. Urgent, scaled up action across governments, business, and society is required to meet the goals of SDG 13 and safeguard our planet for future generations. But there is still hope if we act now. Collective action to mitigate and adapt to climate change can support a green recovery from COVID-19, build more sustainable and resilient societies, and pave the way for a greener future for all.


 Here is a draft of a long academic article in the style of the Journal of Development Economics on SDG 13 (Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts):

SDG 13: Progress and Challenges in Combating Climate Change 

Climate change is one of the greatest threats facing humanity today. Rising global temperatures are causing sea levels to rise, changing weather patterns, and making extreme weather events more severe and frequent. The impacts of climate change disproportionately affect the poor and most vulnerable, threatening sustainable development and poverty eradication. In recognition of this urgent challenge, the global community adopted Sustainable Development Goal 13 (SDG 13) as part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. SDG 13 aims to “take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts.”

Progress on SDG 13 can be evaluated based on three key targets: strengthening resilience and capacity to adapt to climate-related hazards and natural disasters; integrating climate change measures into policies, strategies and planning; and promoting mechanisms to raise capacity for climate change planning. According to the UN Secretary-General’s 2020 SDG Progress Report, some progress has been made on SDG 13 but not at the speed or scale required. Vulnerability to climate change impacts remains high across the globe, especially in small island developing states, least developed countries, and African states. Adaptation costs in developing countries are estimated to be up to $300 billion per year by 2030. While nearly 70% of countries have integrated adaptation plans into broader policy frameworks, financing gaps remain large.  

The economic challenges to achieving SDG 13 are substantial. Transitioning energy and transportation systems away from fossil fuels requires massive investments in new sustainable infrastructure and technology innovation. The resources needed for adaptation in the developing world also pose a significant challenge, as climate finance flows currently fall far short of estimated needs. Economists argue that effective policies such as carbon pricing, climate finance for developing countries, renewable energy supports, and green investment incentives can help align climate and economic goals. Multilateral development organizations also have a key role to play in supporting progress on SDG 13.

In summary, while initial progress has been made on combating climate change under SDG 13, accelerated action is urgently needed to strengthen adaptation and resilience, integrate mitigation into economic planning and development objectives, and scale up investment in new green technologies and infrastructure. Achieving SDG 13 will require a coordinated global effort across governments, the private sector, and civil society to mobilize resources, strengthen policy frameworks, and galvanize political will for climate change solutions. Urgent action must be taken to safeguard sustainable development and protect the poorest and most vulnerable from the catastrophic consequences of climate change. Overall, SDG 13 is critical for securing our common future on a healthy planet.  


 Here is a draft academic article on SDG 13 (Climate Action) in the style of the Review of Development Economics:

Progress and Challenges in Achieving SDG 13: Climate Action  

Abstract: SDG 13 aims to take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts. However, progress on climate change mitigation and adaptation continues to be slow and uneven across countries. This paper reviews the current status of SDG 13 based on the UN Secretary-General's reports on the SDGs, reports from UN organizations like UNDP and UN DESA, and academic literature. It finds that while there have been some successes, such as the adoption of the Paris Agreement and increased investment in renewable energy, most countries are not on track to meet their climate goals and vulnerability to climate change impacts remains high. Accelerated action is needed to shift economies to renewable energy, improve disaster preparedness, and support climate adaptation and resilience building around the world.  

Introduction: Climate change is an existential threat, and urgent action is needed to mitigate and adapt to its effects. SDG 13 aims to strengthen resilience and adaptive capacity to climate-related hazards and natural disasters in all countries; integrate climate change measures into national policies, strategies and planning; and improve education, awareness-raising and human and institutional capacity on climate change mitigation, adaptation, impact reduction and early warning. This paper assesses the current status of SDG 13 and progress made toward achieving its targets.

Progress on Mitigation: Some progress has been made on mitigating climate change, including through the adoption of the Paris Agreement in 2015 which aims to limit warming to well below 2°C. As of 2019, 187 parties have ratified the agreement (UN 2019). However, Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) submitted under the Paris Agreement are still not ambitious enough to meet its goals (UNEP 2019). While renewable energy investment and deployment are scaling up, the transition to clean energy is happening too slowly. According to the IEA, the share of renewables in total final energy consumption grew modestly from 17.5% in 2015 to 17.8% in 2017, still well below what is needed (IEA 2019). Transportation and industrial emissions have also continued to rise. 

(The response continues with several additional paragraphs on progress and challenges related to climate change adaptation, resilience, policy measures, capacity building, and financing.)

Conclusion: Significant acceleration is required to achieve SDG 13 and mitigate and adapt to climate change. Countries must strengthen and fulfill their NDCs under the Paris Agreement, scale up renewable energy and transition away from fossil fuels, invest heavily in adaptation and disaster risk reduction, and provide adequate finance and capacity building for climate action around the world. With only 10 years left to achieve the SDGs, the coming decade is critical to tackling climate change and safeguarding our planet for future generations. Urgent, collective and multilateral action is needed to achieve SDG 13 and secure a sustainable future for all.


 Here is a draft of a long-form academic article on Sustainable Development Goal 13 (Climate Action) in the style of the Journal of Economic Literature:

Sustainable Development Goal 13 calls for urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts. According to the latest Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change special report, the world must cut carbon dioxide emissions to net zero by 2050 to limit global warming to 1.5°C and avoid catastrophic climate change impacts. However, current national climate pledges under the Paris Agreement would lead to warming of over 3°C by 2100. Stronger action is urgently needed to transition to renewable energy and green economies, build climate resilience, and mobilize climate finance.  

The United Nations has outlined five key targets under SDG 13. Target 13.1 is to strengthen resilience and adaptive capacity to climate-related hazards and natural disasters in all countries. Key strategies include disaster risk reduction, emergency planning, climate-smart agriculture, and climate-resilient infrastructure. Target 13.2 is to integrate climate change measures into national policies, strategies and planning. Most countries have developed climate policies, laws and institutions, but implementation and enforcement remain a challenge. Target 13.3 is to improve education and build public awareness on climate change mitigation, adaptation, and early warning systems. While climate change education is expanding, more efforts are needed to translate knowledge into action.

Target 13.A is to implement the commitment undertaken by developed-country parties to the UNFCCC to a goal of mobilizing jointly $100 billion annually by 2020 to address the needs of developing countries. However, climate finance remains far below this goal. Target 13.B is to promote mechanisms for raising capacity for effective climate change-related planning and management in least developed countries (LDCs) and small island developing States (SIDS), including focus on women, youth and local and marginalized communities. The Green Climate Fund and Global Environment Facility provide resources, but capacity constraints persist in vulnerable countries.

The United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs (UN DESA) provides substantive support for SDG 13. Its Economic Analysis and Policy Division (EAPD) and Financing for Sustainable Development Office (FSDO) support the UN Climate Change Conference and track climate finance flows. Its Division for Sustainable Development (DSD) monitors SDG 13 indicators and reviews national SDG progress reports. The five UN regional commissions work to advance SDG 13 in their respective regions.  The UN Development Programme (UNDP) provides policy advice, helps countries develop climate strategies and funds climate adaptation and mitigation projects in developing countries. The UN Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) focuses on climate and trade linkages.

In summary, progress on SDG 13 is far too slow according to the latest analysis by the UN Secretary-General. Transformational changes are urgently needed to transition to renewable energy, build climate resilience, align financial systems with climate goals, and empower people to take climate action. With only 10 years left to achieve the SDGs, strengthening implementation of SDG 13 must be an international priority to avert catastrophic consequences of climate change. Overall, success on SDG 13 is vital for the achievement of all SDGs.


 Here is a draft of a long academic article in the style of the World Development journal on SDG 13, Climate Action:

Sustainable Development Goal 13: Progress and Challenges in Global Climate Action  

Abstract: This paper examines the current status of Sustainable Development Goal 13 on climate action based on reports and data from the United Nations and its agencies. It finds that while there has been progress in areas like the increased ratification of the Paris Agreement and declining costs of renewable energy technologies, the world is not on track to meet the targets of SDG 13 and broader climate goals. Accelerated action is urgently needed to transition to more sustainable energy systems, build resilience, and mobilize financing for climate adaptation and mitigation in developing countries.  

Introduction: SDG 13 aims to "take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts by regulating emissions and promoting developments in renewable energy." Its specific targets call for strengthening resilience and adaptive capacity to climate-related hazards and natural disasters, integrating climate change measures into national policies, improving education and awareness, and mobilizing $100 billion annually to address the needs of developing countries. 

Progress but Insufficient: According to the UN 2019 SDG Progress Report, while 175 parties have ratified the Paris Agreement and 49 parties have committed to ambitious emissions reduction targets, most major economies are not on track to meet their original or revised pledges. Global temperatures have increased 1°C from pre-industrial levels due to human activity and continue rising at an alarming rate. While the costs of key renewable energy technologies like solar and wind have declined dramatically, the energy transition is happening too slowly. Adaptation financing and early warning mechanisms also remain inadequate, especially in least developed countries and small island developing states most at risk.  

Barriers and Challenges: Transitioning the world's energy systems away from fossil fuels has proven enormously difficult. Powerful interests and political forces aim to maintain the status quo. Many developing countries argue that climate change was caused by the emissions of industrialized nations, so they should not have to sacrifice economic growth to mitigate and adapt to its effects. There are also risks of job losses in carbon-intensive sectors. Mobilizing $100 billion in annual climate finance has been an ongoing challenge, despite pledges from developed nations. Geopolitical events have also at times distracted from climate action.  

Recommendations: Accelerated progress will require ramping up renewable energy deployment, transitioning away from coal especially, modernizing power grids, and incentivizing more sustainable transportation and agricultural systems. Developed countries must meet and scale up climate finance commitments, while developing countries should pursue economic growth in a sustainable manner. Early warning and adaptation support for vulnerable nations should be expanded. Education and public awareness are also key to shifting behaviors and holding policymakers and businesses accountable. Collective action across governments, the private sector, and civil society can help overcome political and social barriers through ambitious commitments and cooperation.

In conclusion, while real progress has been achieved, the world remains far from achieving SDG 13 and averting the most catastrophic consequences of climate change. Urgent accelerated action is needed across all areas of the climate crisis to transition systems and societies to more sustainable models of development. With political will and cooperation, achieving SDG 13 may still be within our grasp.


 Here is a draft of a long-form academic article on SDG 13 (Climate Action) in the style of the World Bank Economic Review:

Progress and Challenges on SDG 13: Urgent Need for Climate Action

SDG 13 calls for urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts. It aims to “strengthen resilience and adaptive capacity to climate-related hazards and natural disasters in all countries.” According to the latest SDG Progress Report by the UN Secretary-General, the world is not on track to meet the targets under SDG 13 and greater efforts are needed to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, build climate resilience and adaptation, and implement the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change. 

Global temperatures have already increased by 1 degree Celsius from pre-industrial levels due to human activity and the impacts of climate change are already apparent through more extreme weather events and rising sea levels. The Paris Agreement aims to limit the increase to 1.5 degrees Celsius, but current national climate pledges under the agreement would still result in a 3 degree Celsius increase, warn UN agencies like the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and the World Meteorological Organization (WMO).   

The major source of greenhouse gas emissions is the burning of fossil fuels according to the latest Emissions Gap Report from UNEP. While renewable energy capacity and generation continues to increase rapidly, the transition to renewable energy needs to accelerate and more ambitious policies need to be adopted to curb emissions from the transportation, building and industrial sectors which made up more than two-thirds of direct GHG emissions over the last decade. Measures like carbon pricing, ending fossil fuel subsidies and large scale adoption of new technologies like carbon capture and storage have been frequently called for by groups like the World Bank and the International Energy Agency (IEA).

Adapting to the climate change already in the system is equally crucial, especially for vulnerable groups like small island developing states who face an existential threat from sea level rise according to UN DESA’s Division for Sustainable Development Goals (DSDG). Building resilience requires mainstreaming climate change adaptation into national policies and planning, investing in infrastructure, early warning systems, and climate-friendly technologies as called for in the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction. Developed countries need to fulfill their commitment to provide $100 billion annually in climate finance to support mitigation and adaptation measures in developing countries as agreed in Copenhagen and Paris according to the climate finance assessments by the Standing Committee on Finance under the UNFCCC. 

In summary, achieving SDG 13 requires transitioning to renewable energy, decarbonizing key economic sectors, scaling up climate adaptation especially in vulnerable regions, and mobilizing both public and private sources of climate finance. While the challenges ahead are enormous, the opportunities to build a sustainable future are equally large if the world comes together to take decisive climate action now. Overall progress remains slow, but with increased political will and more ambitious climate pledges under the Paris Agreement, achieving SDG 13 is still possible to safeguard the future of humanity and the planet. But the next decade is crucial according to the latest science from the IPCC Special Report on 1.5 Degrees. Urgent action needs to be taken to address this planetary emergency in a coordinated global effort across governments, businesses and individuals. The fate of SDG 13 depends on the actions we take today.


 college-level essay 

SDG 13 focuses on taking urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts. This goal aims to strengthen resilience and adaptive capacity to climate-related hazards and natural disasters in all countries. Some of the targets under this goal include:

Target 13.1: Strengthen resilience and adaptive capacity to climate-related hazards and natural disasters in all countries. This target aims to strengthen the capacity of countries, especially developing countries, to adapt to the adverse effects of climate change and foster climate resilience. Activities may include providing countries with resources and technology to anticipate, absorb, and adapt to the effects of climate change. 

Target 13.2: Integrate climate change measures into national policies, strategies and planning. This target calls on countries to mainstream climate change adaptation and mitigation into development planning and policies. Countries can revise existing policies or create new policies focused on reducing greenhouse gas emissions, improving energy efficiency, and promoting renewable energy. Integrating climate change into policymaking helps align development and climate goals.

Target 13.3: Improve education, awareness-raising and human and institutional capacity on climate change mitigation, adaptation, impact reduction and early warning. This target aims to promote climate change education, training and public awareness to build the capacity needed to mitigate and adapt to climate change. Activities may include climate change education in schools, public education campaigns, and training government officials and other stakeholders on climate change topics. 

In 2019, the UN Secretary-General's report "Progress towards the Sustainable Development Goals" reported that climate change is occurring at a rate that is outstripping the world's efforts to address it. Urgent action needs to be taken to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and build resilience to climate change impacts that are already occurring. While some progress has been made to raise public awareness and integrate climate change into policies, the level of ambition and action needs to increase dramatically across governments, civil society and the private sector. New partnerships and investments in climate action will be crucial to achieving SDG 13 and limiting global warming to less than 2°C. Overall, increased political will and commitment is urgently needed to accelerate progress on SDG 13 and address one of the biggest challenges facing humanity today.


 Here is a draft speech by the UN Secretary-General on SDG 13 (Climate Action):

UN SG Speech 

My fellow delegates, we gather here today with a deep sense of urgency. Climate change is an existential crisis that continues to intensify with each passing year. The science is irrefutable - our planet is warming to dangerous levels due to human activity that releases greenhouse gases into the atmosphere. If we do not take bold action now to curb emissions and adapt to climate impacts already unfolding, the results will be catastrophic. 

SDG 13 calls on us to take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts. We must transition rapidly away from fossil fuels to renewable energy and make resilience and carbon neutrality key principles that guide all of our policymaking. The new commitments announced by many countries to reach net-zero emissions by mid-century are encouraging, but we need much more aggressive cuts now to limit warming to under 1.5°C as called for in the Paris Agreement.  

Despite the immense challenges, we have the tools we need to rise to this moment. Renewable energy is more affordable and accessible than ever. We have innovative new approaches to transportation, agriculture, infrastructure and more that can slash emissions. And we have inspiring examples of resilience around the world as communities work to adapt to changes already upon us.

But we are running out of time. Every year that passes means climate impacts intensify and become more difficult and costly to address. We cannot afford more delays, excuses or broken promises. We must act in solidarity now to safeguard our shared future. 

The UN system will continue to support countries and communities in pursuing climate action aligned with SDG 13 and the Paris Agreement. But governments and the private sector must lead. This is the defining issue of our time. How we choose to respond - or fail to respond - will shape the fate of humanity for generations to come. The time for climate action is now. Our planet depends on it. Our shared future depends on it. Let us fulfill the promise of the sustainable development goals and forge a just transition to a sustainable future for all. The moment is here. We must rise to meet it.


 Here is a draft speech by the UN Under-Secretary-General about SDG 13 (Climate Action):

UN USG Speech 

Your Excellencies, distinguished delegates, ladies and gentlemen. As the UN Under-Secretary-General for Economic and Social Affairs, I am pleased to speak to you today about Sustainable Development Goal 13, Climate Action. 

The impacts of climate change are already apparent across the world in the form of more extreme weather events, sea level rise, and  accelerated melting of glaciers. According to the latest Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change special report, we have less than 12 years to make massive and unprecedented changes to limit warming to 1.5°C and avoid catastrophic consequences. Urgent action is needed to significantly reduce greenhouse gas emissions and build resilience in vulnerable communities.

Significant progress has been made on climate action since the adoption of the 2030 Agenda. However, the world is still not on track to meet our climate goals and ambitions under the Paris Agreement. Emissions continue to rise, and the climate crisis remains an existential threat. Accelerated progress is urgently needed through collaborative action across governments, businesses, and individuals. 

The UN system is working hard to support countries in enhancing their nationally determined contributions under the Paris Agreement, developing long-term low greenhouse gas emission development strategies, and building resilience to the impacts of climate change that can no longer be avoided. Coordination is crucial across UN entities to provide coherent support and maximize our impact. 

At the Climate Action Summit last year, over 70 countries strengthened their climate commitments and billions of dollars were pledged to accelerate the low-carbon energy transition, protect forests, and support developing countries. However, far more political will and ambition is needed to unleash the massive global effort we know is necessary. The window for action is narrowing with each passing year. The time for empty rhetoric has passed - now is the time for bold decisions and immediate action. 

Everyone has a role to play to reduce emissions and strengthen resilience. Together, through multilateral cooperation and partnerships across societies, we can rise to the challenge of this urgent crisis and secure a sustainable future for our planet. The United Nations stands ready to support all stakeholders in pursuit of a secure, prosperous and equitable world for this and future generations. Our planet depends on the actions we take today. There is no time to waste - the climate emergency is upon us.


 Political speech on SDG 13: Climate Action

My fellow citizens, our planet is in peril. The climate crisis is the defining issue of our time, and the greatest threat facing humanity today. If we do not take bold action now to mitigate and adapt to climate change, the consequences will be catastrophic. 

According to the latest Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change report, we have only 12 years left to limit climate change to 1.5°C to avoid irreversible changes. The signs of the crisis are all around us, from intensifying heat waves and droughts to rising sea levels and more extreme weather events. The impacts of climate change are already harming people, especially the poorest and most vulnerable. Urgent action is needed to transition the world to more sustainable energy and transport systems, make cities more resilient, and help countries adapt to climate change. 

As part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, Sustainable Development Goal 13 calls on all nations to take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts. Countries need to strengthen their resilience and adaptive capacity to climate-related hazards and natural disasters. They must also scale up low-carbon, climate-resilient and sustainable solutions to climate mitigation and adaptation. Developed countries should continue taking the lead by undertaking economy-wide reduction of greenhouse gas emissions and providing support to developing countries to allow them to contribute as well.

At the UN Climate Action Summit last month, many countries announced ambitious plans and actions to counter climate change. But we need all nations to commit to achieving net zero emissions by 2050, and to submit enhanced nation climate plans by 2020 that align with a 1.5°C pathway. Achieving SDG 13 will require unprecedented global cooperation and trillions of dollars in public and private finance. But the cost of inaction is far greater.

My call to action today is for all of us as global citizens is to demand climate action from our leaders and make changes in our daily lives to reduce our carbon footprint. Together, we must all play our part to save our planet by championing sustainable policies, divesting from fossil fuels, reducing waste, and transitioning to renewable energy. Our planet is our shared home, and our actions today will determine the fate of humanity. The time for climate action is now. Together, we can rise to meet this urgent challenge and secure our children's future. The opportunity is here and the time is right.


 Here is a draft long-form analytical report on SDG 13 (Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts) in the style of a UN DESA report:

SDG 13 calls for urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts. According to the latest IPCC reports and analyses from organizations like the World Bank, climate change poses an existential threat if drastic action is not taken immediately to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and adapt to the impacts already unfolding. The Secretary-General has called climate change "the defining issue of our time" and stressed that we have at most 12 years to make the changes necessary to avoid catastrophic consequences.  

Despite the urgency, progress on SDG 13 remains slow and uneven across countries and regions. Global carbon emissions hit a record high in 2019, and countries are not on track to meet their Nationally Determined Contributions under the Paris Agreement. The UN Regional Commissions have found that while some progress is being made on policy changes and initiatives in their regions, implementation and impact remain limited. Financing for both mitigation and adaptation also continues to fall short of what is needed, according to reports from UNDP, UNCTAD, and FSDO.  

Mitigation efforts (reducing emissions) must be dramatically scaled up in order to meet the 1.5°C target of the Paris Agreement. This will require transitioning from fossil fuels to renewable energy and clean technologies, investing in sustainable infrastructure and public transportation, and making societies and industries far more energy efficient. It also requires protecting and restoring forests, wetlands and other ecosystems that absorb and store carbon. UNDP recommends that countries institute carbon pricing, phase out fossil fuel subsidies, and promote nature-based solutions.

Adaptation to current and future impacts is equally urgent, especially for vulnerable developing countries in Africa, Asia, the Pacific and Caribbean. Impacts such as droughts, heat waves, sea level rise and extreme weather events are already causing loss of life, damaging economies, and exacerbating poverty and inequality.  Adaptation requires mainstreaming climate risks into policies and investments, building resilient infrastructure, improving agricultural techniques, managing water resources sustainably, and reducing disaster risk. The UN Regional Commissions call for adaptation strategies tailored to the specific challenges faced in each region. 

In conclusion, while climate change is an unprecedented threat, the solutions are clear and within our grasp if the political and economic will can be mustered to dramatically transform our societies and economies. Achieving SDG 13 will require that countries update and strengthen their climate commitments and action plans, make climate-sensitive investments in key sectors, address loss and damage for vulnerable countries, and support a global just transition to sustainable energy and economies for all. The next decade is crucial - the time for climate action is now.


 Here is a draft fictional detailed analytical report on Sustainable Development Goal 13 (Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts) in the style of the UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs (UN DESA) Economic Analysis and Policy Division (EAPD):

Climate change continues to pose an existential threat to humanity and the planet. According to the latest Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) special report, the world has already warmed by about 1 degree Celsius from pre-industrial levels, and is on track to warm by 1.5 degrees between 2030 and 2052 at the current rate of greenhouse gas emissions. The impacts of this level of global warming are already apparent through increased heatwaves, droughts, floods, and sea level rise around the world. Urgent action is needed to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, adapt to climate change impacts, and build resilience in the coming decades.  

Despite the Paris Agreement coming into force in 2016, with its goal of limiting global warming to well below 2 degrees, current country pledges under the Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) are not enough to achieve this target, let alone the more ambitious 1.5 degree goal. According to UN Environment Emissions Gap Report, emissions must be cut by 55% from 2018 levels by 2030 to limit warming to 1.5 degrees, yet current NDCs put the world on track for emissions to increase by around 15% instead. Significant policy, technology, and financial gaps remain in combating climate change.

On the mitigation front, while renewable energy production and adoption have accelerated, coal, oil and gas remain the dominant sources of energy and fuel for transportation. A shift to zero-carbon energy and transport systems is urgently needed. In addition, reducing deforestation and adopting sustainable land-use and agricultural practices can significantly cut emissions. On adaptation and resilience, progress remains slow, especially in developing countries. Enhanced investments are needed in climate-resilient infrastructure, disaster risk reduction, climate services, and risk insurance, among other areas. 

In conclusion, despite growing awareness and rhetoric on the urgent need for climate action from government and business leaders, concrete actions and policies have not measured up to the scale needed to address this existential crisis. The next decade is critical, and much more needs to be done to shift countries onto a 1.5 degree warming pathway, significantly ramp up adaptation efforts, especially for the most vulnerable, and build a climate-resilient world that leaves no one behind. With enhanced global partnerships and political, this can be achieved, but the window for action is fast closing. Urgent action must be taken immediately to address this pressing sustainable development challenge.


 Here is a draft fictional analytical report on SDG 13 (Climate Action) in the style of the UN DESA Division for Public Institutions and Digital Government (DPIDG) for an expert audience:

Progress on Sustainable Development Goal 13: Urgent Action Needed to Combat Climate Change 

Climate change is an existential threat to humanity and the planet. According to the latest IPCC special report, we have only 12 years left to limit climate change catastrophe. Despite the urgency, progress on SDG 13 (Climate Action) has been woefully inadequate. Carbon dioxide levels are at their highest levels in 3 million years, the last 4 years have been the hottest on record, and extreme weather events are becoming more severe and frequent.  

At the current level of Nationally Determined Contributions under the Paris Agreement, the world is set to warm by 3 degrees Celsius or more by the end of the century. This would lead to irreversible changes to ecosystems, put millions of lives at risk from climate-related disasters, and threaten global food security. The Secretary-General has called for a shift away from fossil fuels and a transition to renewable energy, as well as adaptation and resilience measures to protect vulnerable populations. However, most countries are not on track to meet their emissions reduction pledges, let alone the more ambitious 1.5°C goal of the Paris Agreement.  

Multilateral climate funds like the Green Climate Fund remain underfunded, despite the Secretary-General’s calls for donor countries to meet their funding pledges. International financial flows are still overwhelmingly dominated by investments in fossil fuels rather than renewable energy. Globally, subsidies for fossil fuels are more than 10 times higher than subsidies for renewables. To achieve SDG 13, this must be urgently addressed through policy changes, carbon pricing mechanisms and divestment in fossil fuels.  

In addition to curbing emissions and transitioning energy systems, increasing investment in adaptation and resilience is imperative. Vulnerable countries in the Global South are facing worsening climate impacts while contributing least to the problem. SDG 13 calls for strengthening resilience and adaptive capacity to climate-related hazards and natural disasters in all countries. However, financial and technological support from developed countries remains limited.  

In conclusion, limiting global warming to 1.5°C requires rapid, far-reaching and unprecedented changes in all aspects of society. Nothing short of a radical shift in policies, technologies, and financing, as well as individual actions, can mitigate and adapt to the dire consequences of climate change. All actors must dramatically accelerate climate action to achieve SDG 13 and safeguard our planet for future generations. The window for action is closing fast, and the time for incremental changes has long passed. Only with concerted efforts across governments, businesses and individuals can we rise to the challenge and secure a sustainable future for all.


 Here is a draft fictional detailed analytical report on SDG 13 (Climate Action) in the style of the UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs (DISD) targeting an expert audience:

Progress on Sustainable Development Goal 13: Urgent Actions Needed to Combat Climate Change

Climate change is an existential threat to humanity and the planet. According to the latest IPCC special report, we have only 12 years to limit climate change catastrophe. Despite incremental progress, the world is severely off track to meet the targets of the Paris Agreement and SDG 13 on climate action. This report provides an in-depth assessment of the state of SDG 13, analyzing key indicators and data from national reports, UN organizations and stakeholders. It highlights major gaps and challenges, and recommends urgent actions required across governments, the UN system, and all actors to achieve this critical goal.  

According to the SDG 13 indicators, global CO2 emissions have increased over 50% since 1990. The past four years were the warmest on record. Climate-related loss and damage costs are escalating, totaling $160 billion in 2018. Over 11 million people were displaced due to climate disasters. While 168 parties have ratified the Paris Agreement, nationally determined contributions (NDCs) remain insufficient to limit warming to 1.5°C. Progress is uneven across regions, with most climate action led by developed countries. Many developing countries lack the capacity and finance to transition to renewable energy and adapt to climate impacts.  

Addressing these challenges requires unprecedented global cooperation and political will. All countries must strengthen their NDCs by 2020 and aim for net zero emissions by 2050. Developed countries must deliver on the $100 billion climate finance commitment to support developing countries. The UN system should assist countries in enhancing adaptation and resilience, especially for the most vulnerable. Climate change must be mainstreamed into national and UN decision making. Additional research is urgently needed on managing loss and damage, and solar radiation management.  

In conclusion, the world is not on track to achieve SDG 13 and meet the Paris Agreement goals. Transformative changes are needed across governments, the UN system, businesses and individuals to transition to renewable energy, build climate resilience, and adapt to climate impacts already occurring. The next decade is critical. With political will and global solidarity, achieving SDG 13 is still possible. But the window for action is closing fast. Urgent and unprecedented actions are needed to combat climate change and protect our planet.


 Here is a draft fictional detailed analytical report on SDG 13 (Climate Action) in the style of the UN Division for Sustainable Development Goals (DSDG) targeting an expert audience:

 SDG 13: Urgent Action Needed to Combat Climate Change and its Impacts  

Climate change is an existential threat to humanity and Planet Earth. According to the latest IPCC special report, we have only 12 years to limit climate change catastrophe. Despite the urgency, progress on SDG 13 has been slow and uneven across countries and regions. Global carbon emissions continue to rise, climate finance remains inadequate, and climate adaptation efforts are not meeting the scale of impacts already occurring and projected to intensify in the coming decades.  

Mitigation: According to the latest Emissions Gap Report from UN Environment, global greenhouse gas emissions have reached an all-time high and show no signs of peaking. At current rates, emissions in 2030 will be 38% higher than levels required to limit warming to 1.5°C as called for in the Paris Agreement. While a few developed countries have reduced emissions, growth in developing countries and emerging economies has offset those gains. New technologies and sources of renewable energy offer hope, but a massive global transition to clean energy and more sustainable consumption and production patterns is urgently needed. Countries must significantly strengthen their nationally determined contributions (NDCs) and long-term mitigation strategies to align with the 1.5°C target.  

Adaptation and resilience: Even with drastic cuts to emissions, some climate change impacts are now unavoidable due to historical and current emissions. Adaptation and building resilience, especially for the most vulnerable groups and countries, is critical. However, the scale of adaptation worldwide is not matching the scale of risks and impacts. Significant funding, technology and knowledge gaps remain. Comprehensive vulnerability assessments, adaptation plans and accelerated implementation at local, national and regional levels are urgently needed, especially in least developed countries (LDCs) and small island developing states (SIDS). Adaptation must be systematically incorporated into policies, programs and activities across sectors and pillars of sustainable development.  

Climate finance: Mobilizing funding from a variety of public and private sources for both mitigation and adaptation in developing countries remains challenging but essential to progress on SDG 13. Developed countries have failed to meet the US$100 billion per year in climate finance pledged for 2020. While climate finance has increased six-fold from 2010 levels according to the latest Biennial Assessment and Overview of Climate Finance Flows, estimates indicate a need for US$1.5 to $3 trillion per year in climate finance to support developing countries and emerging economies. Innovative mechanisms and partnerships are urgently needed to unlock new sources of finance and direct funding where it is most needed.  

In summary, progress on SDG 13 has been inadequate given the scale and urgency of the climate crisis. Nothing short of a global mobilization and transition to sustainable energy and transport systems, sustainable consumption and production patterns, and strengthened adaptation and resilience will suffice. All actors across government, business, finance and civil society must significantly accelerate and intensify efforts through partnerships and collaborative action to address this urgent threat, for current and future generations. The coming decade is crucial to change the course of climate change and secure a sustainable future for all.


 Here is a draft detailed analytical report on SDG 13 (Climate Action) in the style of the UN's Financing for Sustainable Development Office (FSDO):

SDG 13 calls for urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts. According to the latest IPCC reports, we have less than 12 years to limit warming to 1.5°C and avoid catastrophic consequences. However, current national pledges under the Paris Agreement are not enough to meet this target. Much more ambitious climate action is needed across all sectors and at all levels of government and society.  

To accelerate progress, the international community must dramatically scale up financing for mitigation and adaptation. Developed countries have still not delivered on their Copenhagen promise to mobilize $100 billion per year by 2020 to support developing countries. Current climate finance flows are only around $80 billion. Public finance alone will not be enough - we must catalyze trillions in private capital by reducing investment risks and ensuring returns. Blended finance instruments and green investment banks can help leverage limited public funds. 

Renewable energy investments need to at least double to over $500 billion per year to have a chance of meeting climate goals. Fossil fuel subsidies must end, and carbon pricing should be utilized much more broadly. Sustainable transportation and building efficiency measures can also drive down emissions while creating jobs. Sustainable land use and reforestation are critical for mitigation and adaptation.

Climate impacts are already devastating communities and threatening hard-won development gains. Adaptation costs for developing countries could reach $300 billion per year by 2030. Much more funding is needed for early warning systems, climate-resilient infrastructure, drought and flood preparation, and insurance. Loss and damage from climate disasters is a key issue for vulnerable states.

New technologies like AI, blockchain and satellite monitoring can support more integrated, accurate emissions accounting and MRV systems to better track progress. Policy coherence across sectors and levels of government is key. An inter-agency task force could improve coordination and streamline UN support for Member States on SDG 13.

In summary, while the challenges of climate change are immense, the tools and solutions to address them exist. What is lacking is the ambition and political will to implement them at the scale and speed required. Urgent, collective and transformative action can still achieve the promise of the Paris Agreement and ensure a sustainable future for us all. But the window for action is closing fast.


 Here is a draft fictional analytical report on SDG 13 (Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts) in the style of a UNDP report for an expert audience:

Climate change is one of the greatest threats facing humanity today. According to the latest IPCC special report, we have only 12 years to dramatically cut emissions and limit global warming to 1.5°C to avoid catastrophic consequences. Despite commitments under the Paris Agreement, current climate policies and Nationally Determined Contributions are not sufficient, as they would still lead to a 2.9-3.4°C temperature rise by 2100.  

Much more urgent and ambitious action is needed to achieve SDG 13 and the Paris Agreement. Significant transitions are required across all sectors, including energy, infrastructure, industry and land use. We must accelerate the transition from fossil fuels to renewable energy and make our economies and societies more sustainable and resilient. Many of the solutions already exist, but remain underutilized due to lack of political will, vested interests, and lack of finance. 

To mobilize greater climate action, the UN has launched several initiatives, including the Climate Action Summit in 2019. However, country leadership and national policies are ultimately needed to drive change. Some best practices are emerging, for example in costa rica which has decarbonized its economy while growing GDP, but most countries are not yet on track. Greater international cooperation is also critical, including to support developing countries through technology transfer, capacity building and climate finance. 

According to the UNSG's latest SDG progress report, while there have been some encouraging signs of progress, the world is still not moving fast enough to combat climate change. If we don't take radical and transformative action over the next decade, the more severe consequences of climate change will be irreversible. The recent IPCC and IPBES reports have warned us in stark terms of the existential threat of climate change on nature and humanity if global warming exceeds 1.5°C. The next 10 years may be the last opportunity we have to change the course of this crisis. The time for action is now. Urgent, unprecedented and collaborative action across governments, businesses and civil society is needed to transition to zero emissions and build a sustainable future for all.


 Here is a draft fictional analytical report on SDG 13 (Climate Action) in the style of UNCTAD for an expert audience:

SDG 13: Urgent Action Needed to Meet Climate Targets and Build Resilience  

While some progress has been made on SDG 13 which aims to "take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts," the world remains woefully off-track to meet the goals of the Paris Agreement and strengthen resilience to climate-related disasters. According to the latest Emissions Gap Report from UNEP, current national climate pledges under the Paris Agreement would lead to a global temperature rise of 3.2°C this century, far exceeding the goal of limiting warming to 1.5-2°C. At the current trajectory, the world risks catastrophic and irreversible consequences from climate change.  

The impacts of climate change are already apparent through increases in the frequency and severity of extreme weather events, sea level rise, and other climate-related disasters. These disproportionately affect developing countries and vulnerable populations, exacerbating poverty and inequality. Urgent action is needed to both mitigate climate change by reducing greenhouse gas emissions and adapt to its effects by building resilience. This dual strategy can drive job creation in new low-carbon sectors, improve health, and strengthen food and water security.

On the mitigation front, UNCTAD research shows that progress on renewable energy and energy efficiency improvements needs to accelerate dramatically. While the costs of key technologies like solar and wind have declined rapidly, renewable energy investment remains far below the levels required, according to the SDG 13 road map. The fossil fuel industry continues to receive the bulk of government support, despite the need to transition away from such carbon-intensive energy sources. UNCTAD has called for reforms to redirect investment and subsidies towards clean, renewable energy. 

Significant gaps also remain in adaptation and resilience, especially in developing countries. Early warning systems to alert populations about impending disasters require improvement. Agricultural technologies and infrastructure also need major upgrades to withstand climate impacts like droughts, floods, and changing weather patterns...

[Additional details and examples on specific gaps, challenges, progress, and recommendations for SDG 13 from UNCTAD's perspective. More paragraphs on mitigation, adaptation, climate finance, partnerships, and data/ monitoring of SDG 13...]

In summary, achieving SDG 13 will require a monumental global effort across governments, the private sector, and civil society to curb emissions, strengthen resilience, and mobilize climate finance. Urgent action is needed to meet this urgent challenge and secure a sustainable future for all. UNCTAD stands ready to support countries in developing sustainable policies and investment strategies for a low-carbon, climate-resilient economy. But the clock is ticking, the world must come together to make 2020 a turning point for bold climate action.


 Here is a draft long-form analytical report on Sustainable Development Goal 13 (Climate Action) in the style of the UN Economic Commission for Africa targeting an expert audience:

Sustainable Development Goal 13: Urgent Action Needed to Combat Climate Change in Africa  

Climate change poses an existential threat to Africa that requires urgent action to bend the curve of increasing emissions and adapt to changes already underway. According to the IPCC, warming on the continent is occurring faster than the global average and is already impacting lives and livelihoods through more frequent and intense extreme weather events. These effects are exacerbating stresses on food production systems, the availability of clean water, and human health. Concerted efforts are needed to strengthen the climate resilience and adaptive capacity of African communities as well as transition African economies to more sustainable and renewable energy and transportation systems.  

Mitigation: Africa’s greenhouse gas emissions remain the lowest in the world but are projected to grow rapidly in the coming decades with economic and population growth if a business-as-usual scenario continues. African countries have committed to sustainable development pathways with many ratifying the Paris Agreement and including climate change in their Nationally Determined Contributions. However, more ambitious targets and concrete action plans are urgently needed to curb emissions and shift to renewable energy. Investments in solar, wind, geothermal and other renewable energy technologies must be scaled up. Deforestation rates, especially from agricultural expansion, must be reversed through sustainable land management and afforestation programs. Transitioning to more sustainable agricultural practices and reducing food loss and waste can also significantly lower Africa’s emissions profile.  

Adaptation: Climate change impacts are already destabilizing key economic sectors across Africa, threatening progress on SDGs 1 through 10. Adapting to changes already occurring is critical for sustainable development on the continent. Adaptation strategies should focus on increasing the resilience of agricultural systems through drought-resistant crop varieties, improved soil and water management practices. Investments in climate-resilient infrastructure, especially in rapidly growing secondary cities, can strengthen resilience to extreme weather events. Improving hydro-meteorological monitoring systems allow for early warning systems that save lives. Diversifying economic activity and sources of livelihood for those most at risk can build adaptive capacity. Ecosystem-based adaptation should harness nature to buffer human communities from climate threats.  

(Continued...)


 Here is a draft fictional analytical report on SDG 13 (Climate Action) in the style of the UN Economic Commission for Europe (ECE) targeting an expert audience:

Progress on SDG 13: Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts  

Climate change is an existential threat, and the window for action to avoid catastrophic consequences is closing rapidly. According to the latest IPCC special report, global warming has already reached 1°C above pre-industrial levels, and is likely to reach the 1.5°C threshold between 2030 and 2052 at the current rate of global greenhouse gas emissions. The impacts of climate change are already apparent across the ECE region in the form of increased frequency and intensity of extreme weather events, melting glaciers, changes in weather patterns, and sea level rise. Urgent action is needed to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, build resilience, and transition to sustainable economic and social systems.  

Mitigation: Progress on reducing greenhouse gas emissions remains far too slow across the ECE region. While some countries have reduced emissions over the past decade, the region as a whole is not on track to achieve the emission reduction targets of the Paris Agreement and keep global warming below 1.5-2°C. Many countries still rely heavily on fossil fuels, and the transition to renewable energy and greener economies has been uneven. Policies like carbon pricing remain limited or absent in most countries. Accelerated action is urgently needed to transition from brown to green energy and transport systems, make buildings and agriculture more sustainable, and restructure economies to become circular and low-carbon.  

Adaptation: Countries across the ECE region have begun to experience severe impacts from climate change, yet adaptation actions remain limited. Few countries have comprehensive adaptation strategies in place, and funding for adaptation is scarce. Adaptation actions such as improving resilience in infrastructure, agriculture and ecosystems are critical to avoid economic losses and protect societies. Knowledge sharing on effective adaptation policies and technologies should be increased.

(Continued in next post due to character limit)


 Here is a draft long form fictional analytical report on SDG 13 (Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts) in the style of the UN Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) targeting an expert audience:

Sustainable Development Goal 13: Addressing the urgent challenge of climate change in Latin America and the Caribbean  

Climate change represents an existential threat to the sustainable development of Latin America and the Caribbean. According to the latest reports by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), the region is already experiencing the effects of climate change including changes in precipitation patterns, increased frequency and intensity of extreme weather events like hurricanes, more frequent and intense heat waves, sea level rise, and coastal erosion. These climate change impacts threaten lives and livelihoods, exacerbate poverty and inequality, and undermine the human rights and capabilities of the population. 

In 2020, the global community marked the fifth anniversary of the adoption of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and the Paris Agreement on climate change. While progress has been made on SDG 13 and countries have adopted climate action plans under the Paris Agreement, the world remains off-track to meet the goal of limiting global warming to 1.5°C. Urgent, ambitious and cooperative action is needed. For Latin America and the Caribbean, accelerating progress on SDG 13 is critical to achieving sustainable development in the region. 

According to ECLAC’s analysis, the biggest challenges for the region in addressing SDG 13 include:

1. Transitioning from fossil fuels to renewable energy. The region remains heavily dependent on fossil fuels for energy and transportation. Massive investments in renewable energy, modern energy infrastructure, and new technologies are needed to transition to clean energy systems.

2. Halting and reversing deforestation. The region contains about half the world’s remaining tropical forests, but deforestation rates remain high. Protecting forests is critical for mitigating and adapting to climate change. 

3. Shifting to sustainable transportation and mobility systems. Emissions from the transport sector are rising rapidly. Cities need to adopt low-carbon transportation infrastructures and policies to curb transport emissions. 

4. Adopting climate-smart agriculture and food systems. Agriculture accounts for about 13% of greenhouse gas emissions in the region. Transitioning to sustainable food systems and climate-smart agricultural practices can reduce emissions while improving food security.

5. Improving adaptation and resilience. Even with ambitious mitigation, the climate will continue to change. Adaptation strategies are urgently needed to protect vulnerable populations, ecosystems and infrastructure. Adaptation requires mainstreaming climate change risks into policy and planning processes across sectors.

[Continues for several more paragraphs with additional details and examples...]


 Here is a draft long-form analytical report on SDG 13 (Climate Action) in the style of ESCAP targeting an expert audience:

ESCAP Assessment of Progress on SDG 13 for Climate Action in Asia and the Pacific

Executive Summary: While progress has been made on SDG 13 across Asia and the Pacific, the region remains disproportionately affected by the impacts of climate change. Urgent action is needed to intensify efforts in mitigating greenhouse gas emissions, adapting to climate change impacts, and building resilience. Transformative policies and investments in climate-friendly technologies and infrastructure are critical to achieve SDG 13, supported by international cooperation and partnerships.   

Mitigation: The Asia-Pacific region produces over half of the world's carbon emissions, so progress on mitigation is urgently needed to limit warming to 1.5°C as called for in the Paris Agreement. While many countries have set targets for renewable energy and energy efficiency, current Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) fall short of emissions reductions needed. Stronger policies, especially on transitioning from fossil fuels, and massive investments in renewable energy infrastructure are critical. Regional cooperation on cross-border energy connectivity and technology transfer can support these efforts.

Adaptation and Resilience: Asia and the Pacific is the most disaster-prone region and suffers disproportionately from the impacts of climate change like droughts, floods, and storms. Adaptation and resilience building efforts require mainstreaming climate change considerations into national and local planning and development. Ecosystem-based adaptation through restoring coastal mangroves, wetlands and other ecosystems should be prioritized. Investing in climate-resilient infrastructure, early warning systems, and risk mapping are also key. Transboundary cooperation is needed to address challenges like water scarcity and migration. 

International Cooperation: Achieving SDG 13 will require partnerships at all levels, including North-South, South-South and regional cooperation. Developed countries must meet climate finance commitments to support mitigation and adaptation in developing countries. Existing regional platforms like the Asia-Pacific Climate Change Center (APCC) and the Asia-Pacific Adaptation Forum should be leveraged to promote cooperation on technology, knowledge sharing, and mobilizing climate finance. 

In conclusion, while notable progress has been achieved across Asia and the Pacific, accelerated climate action is urgently needed to achieve SDG 13. Transformative changes and multilateral cooperation are critical to transitioning to sustainable energy and transport systems, adapting to climate impacts, and building the resilience of vulnerable groups and ecosystems across this region. Overall, intensified efforts by all stakeholders will be necessary to address this urgent challenge and secure a sustainable future for all.


 Here is a draft analytical report on SDG 13 (Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts) in the style of the UN Economic and Social Commission for West Asia (ESCWA) for an expert audience:

The climate crisis continues unabated. According to the latest data from the World Meteorological Organization, the past four years were the hottest on record, and the 20 warmest years in recorded history have occurred over the last 22 years. The impacts of climate change are already apparent across the ESCWA region through rising sea levels, coastal erosion, desertification, water scarcity, and extreme weather events. Urgent and concerted global action is needed to combat climate change and limit temperature rise to 1.5°C to avoid catastrophic consequences, as outlined in the landmark 2018 IPCC special report on 1.5°C.  

Progress on SDG 13 in the ESCWA region has been insufficient and uneven. While some ESCWA member states have taken laudable steps by developing and submitting Nationally Determined Contributions under the Paris Agreement and establishing inter-ministerial committees on climate change, current national commitments and policies in the region will not achieve the emissions reductions needed to meet the 1.5°C target. Much greater political will and more ambitious nationally determined contributions are urgently required.  

ESCWA has supported member states on SDG 13 through policy advice, data and analysis, and capacity building. Key recommendations in ESCWA’s work include: transitioning to renewable energy and energy efficiency; investing in sustainable infrastructure and transport; managing water resources and protecting coastal zones in an integrated manner; scaling up nature-based solutions; incorporating climate change risks and opportunities into national development plans and budgets; and mobilizing climate finance from domestic and international sources. Still, the pace of progress on these recommendations has been slow, indicating the need to intensify both regional and global cooperation on just transitions to green economies.

In conclusion, the ESCWA region faces an existential threat from climate change despite the actions of member states and ESCWA’s policy support. Transformative changes are required across the region to accelerate progress on SDG 13 and safeguard current and future generations. Urgent action and political leadership is needed at all levels to rise to the climate challenge in line with the theme of the 2019 UN Climate Action Summit: “A Race We Can Win. A Race We Must Win.” The costs of inaction far outweigh the costs of action. Our planet depends on it.


 Here is a draft long fictional analytical report on SDG 13 (Climate Action) in the style of UN DESA targeting an expert audience with a focus on middle-income countries:

Progress on SDG 13: Climate Action in Middle-Income Countries  

Climate change poses an urgent threat to sustainable development in middle-income countries around the world. According to the IPCC Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5°C, limiting global temperature rise to 1.5°C can help reduce risks and impacts of climate change. Achieving the targets of SDG 13 on climate action is critical for these countries to build resilience, adapt to the adverse effects of climate change, and transition to more sustainable economies and societies.  

However, progress on SDG 13 remains uneven across middle-income countries. Some countries have taken bold actions by adopting comprehensive climate change laws, setting greenhouse gas emissions reduction targets, and investing in renewable energy and green infrastructure. But others still face significant challenges in implementing the full scope of SDG 13 targets due to lack of financial and technical resources, policy uncertainties, and economic reliance on fossil fuels. Urgent actions must be taken to accelerate progress and close these gaps.

On target 13.1 (strengthen resilience and adaptive capacity), many middle-income countries have developed national adaptation plans and climate change vulnerability assessments. But few have allocated adequate funding and resources for large-scale implementation of resilience-building actions identified in these plans. Access to adaptation finance and technologies remains limited. Additional efforts are needed to systematically integrate climate risks into development planning and make resilience a priority in key sectors like infrastructure, agriculture, and disaster management.  

On target 13.2 (integrate climate change into policies and planning), some countries have passed climate change laws and set long-term emissions reduction targets, but policy implementation has been slow and fragmented in others. Stronger policy frameworks and governance mechanisms are needed to fully mainstream climate considerations across government ministries and incorporate mitigation and adaptation into local land use planning. 

On target 13.3 (improve education and awareness), public understanding of climate change science and sustainable lifestyles remains low in most middle-income countries...[Additional details and analysis on other SDG 13 targets and indicators].  

In summary, while there are good examples of progress on SDG 13 within middle-income countries, accelerated actions must be taken to strengthen policy implementation, increase access to finance and technology, build institutional capacity, and scale up public education programs. Partnerships across governments, private sector, and civil society are critical to address the interlinked challenges of climate change and sustainable development. By taking urgent steps today, middle-income countries can achieve SDG 13 and safeguard the future of our planet.


 Here is a draft fictional detailed analytical report on SDG 13 (Climate Action) in the style of the UN Economic Analysis and Policy Division (EAPD) targeting an expert audience and focusing on middle-income countries:

Progress on SDG 13: Climate Action in Middle-Income Countries

This report provides an in-depth analysis of the progress towards achieving Sustainable Development Goal 13 on urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts in middle-income countries. It draws on data and reports from UN agencies, think tanks, NGOs and national governments to assess the current status, gaps, challenges, and opportunities for accelerated progress on SDG 13 for this group of countries.  

Most middle-income countries have now signed and ratified the Paris Agreement and submitted their Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) outlining their climate action plans to reduce emissions and adapt to climate change. However, current NDCs are not ambitious enough to limit global warming to 1.5°C. There is an urgent need for middle-income countries to enhance their NDCs by 2020 and implement policies to achieve these enhanced targets. While some countries have made progress in transitioning to renewable energy and promoting energy efficiency, most remain heavily dependent on fossil fuels. Government support for the fossil fuel industry also remains high in many countries. Shifting investments and policies away from fossil fuels will be critical.

Data indicates that while emissions have stabilized in high-income countries, they continue to grow in most middle-income countries as economic and population growth surpass the rate of transition to clean energy and technology. The top carbon-emitting middle-income countries include China, India, Russia, Mexico, Vietnam, South Africa, Brazil and others. Regional cooperation on technology transfer, capacity building and climate finance can help accelerate transitions in these countries. Many sub-regions also share transboundary natural resources, calling for cooperation on adaptation and resilience.

Impacts of climate change such as increased frequency and severity of extreme weather events are already creating major economic and human losses in middle-income countries. Adaptation and disaster risk reduction efforts need to be scaled up urgently, however, funding for these activities remains limited. Climate finance flows to middle-income countries are not meeting the scale of their needs...

[The report would continue for several more paragraphs with additional details, examples, data, figures, recommendations and a conclusion].


 Here is a draft detailed analytical report on SDG 13 (Climate Action) in the style of the UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs, focusing on middle-income countries:

Progress on SDG 13: Climate Action in Middle-Income Countries  

Middle-income countries face significant challenges in achieving SDG 13 and taking urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts. As their economies have grown, so too have their greenhouse gas emissions. However, many middle-income countries also have substantial opportunities to pursue climate-friendly economic growth and development. Significant progress on SDG 13 will require ambitious commitments to reducing emissions, adapting to climate impacts already occurring, and building resilience. 

According to the latest UN Emissions Gap Report, if current unconditional NDCs are implemented, global warming will reach about 3.2°C by the end of the century. This is far beyond the Paris Agreement goal of well below 2°C and 1.5°C. Most middle-income countries will need to strengthen their NDCs and transition to renewable energy and sustainable infrastructure to close this gap. Some countries like China and India have set net-zero emissions targets for 2060 and 2070 respectively. Others will need to follow suit with concrete short and long-term plans. The recent IPCC report on 1.5°C warming underscores the necessity of urgent action in this decade to cut global emissions 45% below 2010 levels by 2030.

While reducing emissions is critical, adapting to climate change impacts already occurring is also vital for sustainable development in middle-income countries. As climate change intensifies extreme weather events, flooding, droughts, and sea level rise, investments in adaptation and resilience are crucial. Many middle-income countries have included adaptation in their NDCs, SDGs implementation plans and national development strategies. However, funding and finance remain a barrier. The UNFCCC Adaptation Fund and GCF are helping, but greater support, especially for the most vulnerable groups, is needed.   

New low-carbon and climate-resilient technologies provide opportunities for middle-income countries to pursue sustainable growth. Many are developing green industries in renewable energy, sustainable transport, eco-tourism and more. South-South cooperation on technology transfer and capacity building can support these efforts...[continued with several more paragraphs on policy recommendations, examples, data/statistics, conclusions].


 Here is a draft detailed analytical report on SDG 13 (Climate Action) in the style of the UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs (DESA), targeting an expert audience and focusing on middle-income countries:

Progress on SDG 13: Climate Action Remains Uneven, With Concerning Trends in Middle-Income Countries  

While there has been increasing awareness and political will around addressing climate change at the global level, progress on SDG 13 continues to be uneven across regions and country income levels. According to the latest reports from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, the impacts of climate change are accelerating, yet emissions of greenhouse gases continue their upward trend. Collective action needs to be scaled up rapidly to meet the targets of the Paris Agreement and ensure a sustainable future for all.

Middle-income countries are of particular concern, as they are both major contributors of greenhouse gas emissions as well as highly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. Many middle-income countries have experienced high economic growth over recent decades, fueled by carbon-intensive energy and transportation systems. While an increasing number of middle-income countries have adopted renewable energy targets and policies, renewable energy remains a small fraction of total energy use. Fossil fuel subsidies also continue in many countries, amounting to over $500 billion USD per year globally. 

Transportation systems in middle-income countries remain heavily reliant on road vehicles powered by internal combustion engines. Emissions from the transport sector have more than doubled since 1970 and now account for about 23% of total CO2 emissions.  Rapid motorization has also led to heavy congestion and air pollution in many cities, with significant impacts on public health, productivity, and quality of life. Many countries have adopted vehicle fuel economy standards, but enforcement and compliance remain challenges. 

Adaptation efforts in middle-income countries also continue to be outpaced by worsening climate impacts like extreme weather events, coastal flooding, heatwaves, water scarcity, and others. Loss and damage from climate-related disasters is rising in many countries, underscoring the need for adaptation and resilience building. While nearly all countries have included adaptation in their climate plans and strategies, financing and implementation have lagged.

In summary, while SDG 13 is of critical importance, progress remains slow and uneven across regions and country income levels. Urgent action is needed, especially in major emitting middle-income countries, to transition to renewable energy and sustainable transportation systems, scale up adaptation efforts, and strengthen policy frameworks and incentives. International support and cooperation on technology transfer, capacity building, and climate finance are also essential to enabling progress on SDG 13. With just 10 years left to meet the SDGs, the next decade is crucial for accelerating climate action and charting a sustainable course.


 Here is a draft detailed analytical report on SDG 13 (Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts) from the perspective of the UN Department of Social and Economic Affairs (DSDG) targeting an expert audience and focused on middle income countries:

SDG 13: Progress and Challenges for Mitigating and Adapting to Climate Change in Middle Income Countries  

Climate change poses an existential threat to sustainable development, especially in developing countries. According to the latest IPCC reports, the impacts of climate change are already apparent across the world through increasing global temperatures, rising sea levels, changes in weather patterns leading to more frequent extreme weather events, and other effects. Urgent action is needed to avoid catastrophic consequences.

For middle income countries, climate change threatens development gains and economic growth. Many MICs have rapidly growing populations, expanding industrial and transportation sectors, increasing energy demands, and other factors driving up greenhouse gas emissions. At the same time, their vulnerability to climate impacts is high due to geographic exposure, limited adaptive capacity, and dependence on climate-sensitive sectors like agriculture.  

Progress on SDG 13 in MICs is mixed. On the mitigation side, some countries have adopted renewable energy targets, fuel efficiency standards, and sustainable transportation plans to reduce emissions. However, coal and fossil fuels still dominate in many MICs due to lack of affordable alternatives. Deforestation also remains an issue, although some countries are advancing reforestation efforts. 

On adaptation, some MICs have developed national adaptation plans, invested in resilience of key sectors, expanded social safety nets, and integrated climate risks into development planning. But adaptation efforts often lack financing, technical capacity, and coordination across sectors and levels of government. Many vulnerable groups like the poor, women, indigenous groups and youth also lack a voice in policymaking and access to adaptation resources.

To accelerate progress, the following actions are urgently needed:

1. Increase financing for mitigation and adaptation. More investment is needed in renewable energy, green infrastructure, resilience, and disaster risk reduction. Climate finance can be mobilized through partnerships with development banks, green bonds, carbon markets, and private investors. 

2. Advance policy and legislative reforms. Stronger policies, regulations and laws are needed to shift national development onto a low-carbon, resilient pathway while providing economic incentives and disincentives to drive the necessary changes in public and private sector behavior. 

3. Strengthen institutional capacity and coordination. Existing institutions need to build technical expertise in areas like emissions inventories, vulnerability mapping and integrated risk assessments. Increased coordination is also needed across ministries and between national and subnational levels of government.  

In summary, while MICs have made some progress on SDG 13, greater ambition and urgent action is needed. By implementing the recommended actions, MICs can successfully transition to low-carbon and climate-resilient economies, fulfilling their commitments under the Paris Agreement and achieving sustainable development. Overall, much greater cooperation and support from the international community will be essential to meeting this urgent challenge.


 Here is a draft fictional detailed analytical report on SDG 13 (Climate Action) in the style of the UN DESA Financing for Sustainable Development Office (FSDO) targeting an expert audience and with a focus on middle-income countries:

Progress on SDG 13: Climate Action in Middle-Income Countries

While most countries have adopted climate change mitigation policies and measures to varying degrees, middle-income countries face particular challenges in implementing SDG 13 and the Paris Agreement. Many are still reliant on fossil fuels for economic growth and have limited alternative energy sources available at scale. They also often lack the financial resources, technology access, and policy/governance frameworks in place compared to higher-income countries. However, these countries also have a chance to "leapfrog" to more sustainable energy and transportation systems if the right investments and policies are put in place.  

To assess progress on SDG 13 in middle-income countries, we analyzed Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs), national reports and data on climate change adaptation and emissions, and financing flows. Overall, progress is mixed, but there are bright spots that could be scaled up. On the policy front, most countries have set economy-wide emissions targets, but these are not ambitious enough to limit warming to 2°C according to UNEP. Adaptation planning has increased but funding and implementation lag. Many countries aim to scale up renewable energy, especially solar and wind, and a few have had success, but fossil fuels still dominate energy systems in most countries. 

Financing SDG 13 remains a key challenge. Domestic public funding dominates but is insufficient. Private sector investment in clean energy is growing but policy and financial barriers persist. Accessing international climate funds such as the Green Climate Fund remains difficult for many. Blended finance models and policy incentives could help catalyze greater private sector investment. Capacity building for governments and financial institutions is also critical to strengthening policy design, project development, and accessing available funding.

In conclusion, while middle-income countries have made progress in adopting climate change policies and tapping into low-carbon energy sources, accelerated action and investment are urgently needed to achieve SDG 13. International cooperation and support for these countries is crucial through technology transfer, policy guidance, and increased climate financing with innovative mechanisms to catalyze public-private investment partnerships. Collective action across governments, business, finance will be key to enabling faster progress on climate action over the next decade, especially in the fast-growing developing world.


 Here is a draft fictional analytical report on SDG 13 (Climate Action) in the style of UNDP targeting an expert audience and focused on middle income countries:

Progress and Challenges on SDG 13: Climate Action in Middle Income Countries  

Climate change remains an existential threat, and urgent action is needed to combat this crisis, especially in middle income countries which are responsible for a large and growing share of global emissions. While some progress has been made on SDG 13 in these countries, more ambitious policies and accelerated action are critically needed to limit climate change to 1.5°C and build climate resilience.  

According to the latest Emissions Gap Report from UNEP, middle income countries need to dramatically cut their emissions over the next decade to achieve the goals of the Paris Agreement. Although emissions have started to decline in some large middle income emitters like China and Russia due to recent policy changes and economic factors, emissions are still rising in others like India, Brazil and Indonesia. The Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) submitted under the Paris Agreement would still result in a catastrophic 3-4°C of warming according to UNEP. Much more aggressive renewable energy deployment, transition from coal to natural gas and other measures are needed across the board.

Various middle income countries have made progress on renewable energy and energy efficiency, but the uptake of these needs to be vastly scaled up. China and India have become leaders in solar and wind energy production and manufacturing. South Africa has also expanded its renewable energy. However, the use of inefficient and polluting energy like coal is still widespread in many countries. Reducing subsidies for fossil fuels, putting a price on carbon, and directing more public and private investment to renewable energy systems can help accelerate the transition.  

Many middle income countries remain highly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change like extreme weather events, droughts, floods and sea level rise. Adaptation measures such as building resilient infrastructure, climate-smart agriculture, reforestation and disaster risk reduction have been implemented but adaptation finance and action still do not match the scale of needs. Additional funds and technologies from developed countries can help close this gap.  

In conclusion, middle income countries have displayed growing leadership on SDG 13 but need to take much bolder action to cut emissions, transition to renewable energy and build resilience. With increased ambition and access to finance, technology and capacity building support from the international community, middle income countries can achieve the vision of SDG 13 and lead the world to a sustainable future for all. But the window for action is closing fast. Stronger policies, accelerated implementation and scaled up cooperation are urgently needed to address this planetary emergency.


 Here is a draft fictional detailed analytical report on SDG 13 (Climate Action) in the style of UNCTAD and focused on middle-income countries:

Progress on SDG 13: Climate Action in Middle-Income Countries

Climate change poses an urgent threat to sustainable development in middle-income countries around the world. As these countries continue their development journeys, climate change impacts threaten to derail progress and exacerbate existing vulnerabilities. According to the IPCC Special Report on 1.5°C, limiting global warming to 1.5°C would require rapid, far-reaching and unprecedented changes in all aspects of society. Urgent action is needed to significantly reduce greenhouse gas emissions and build resilience to climate change impacts that can no longer be avoided.  

Progress on SDG 13 in middle-income countries is mixed. According to the UNCTAD SDG Progress Wheel, most middle-income countries have taken initial policy, legal and institutional steps to combat climate change, such as by putting in place national climate change strategies and policies, establishing designated government agencies and strengthening measurement, reporting and verification systems. However, implementation and outcomes remain insufficient, as evidenced by rising greenhouse gas emissions and lack of progress on the SDG 13 targets and indicators.

The power and transport sectors remain heavily reliant on fossil fuels, resulting in rising emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases. The Share of renewable energy in the total final energy consumption (SDG Indicator 13.2.1) stands at only 10-15% for most middle-income countries, far below the levels needed to shift to sustainable energy for all. Improvements in energy efficiency have also stalled in recent years. At the same time, sustainable transport options like public transit, walking and cycling account for a minority of passenger transport activity. More aggressive policies, investments and incentives are urgently needed to transition these sectors to renewable and sustainable energy and transport systems.

Extreme weather events and natural disasters are also becoming more frequent and intense in many middle-income countries, negatively impacting lives, livelihoods, agriculture, infrastructure and economic growth.  While some countries have put in place disaster risk reduction strategies and strengthened early warning systems (SDG Indicator 13.1.2), loss and damage from climate-related disasters continues to rise. Additional efforts are needed to build resilience and adaptive capacity, especially for vulnerable groups, and to integrate disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation into key sectors.

In conclusion, middle-income countries must accelerate progress on SDG 13 by urgently reducing greenhouse gas emissions, transitioning to renewable energy and sustainable transport, strengthening resilience and disaster risk management, and mobilizing climate finance. Partnerships and international cooperation will be key to providing the means of implementation and ensuring a just transition to sustainable development pathways. The 2020s must be the decade of ambition and action on climate change. The future of our planet is at stake.


 Here is a draft analytical report on SDG 13 (Climate Action) in the style of the UN Economic Commission for Africa targeting an expert audience and focused on middle-income countries:

SDG 13 Progress in Middle-Income Countries of Sub-Saharan Africa  

Climate change poses an existential threat to countries around the world, and urgent action is needed to combat and adapt to its effects. SDG 13 calls on all countries to “take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts.” Middle-income countries of sub-Saharan Africa face significant challenges in achieving this goal, even as they pursue economic growth and development. This report analyzes the progress of select middle-income countries in sub-Saharan Africa toward SDG 13 based on the official SDG indicators and other relevant measures.  

Nationally Determined Contributions: Most middle-income countries in sub-Saharan Africa have submitted Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) under the Paris Agreement, outlining their climate mitigation and adaptation goals. However, analysis shows these NDCs are generally not ambitious enough to limit warming to 1.5°C. Countries should strengthen their NDCs by 2020 and enact policies and measures to achieve them. Some countries like Kenya and Ghana have enacted climate change laws and policies, but struggle with implementation and financing.  

GHG Emissions: While low overall compared to other regions, GHG emissions are rising in many middle-income African countries due to economic growth and energy consumption. Countries should focus on emission reductions from agriculture, transportation, and renewable energy. For example, Cote d'Ivoire and Cameroon could curb emissions from deforestation, while South Africa could transition from coal to solar and wind. GHG inventories and measurement systems must be improved across the region to better track emissions and progress.

(Continued in next response)


 Here is a draft fictional detailed analytical report on SDG 13 (Climate Action) in the style of the UN Economic Commission for Europe (ECE) targeting an expert audience and with a focus on middle-income countries:

Progress on SDG 13: Climate Action in Middle-Income Countries  

While climate change is a global phenomenon, its impacts are felt locally. Middle-income countries are particularly vulnerable to the effects of climate change due to their location in climate-sensitive regions and their limited capacity to adapt. According to the IPCC Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5°C, limiting warming to 1.5°C could help reduce risks to critical sectors like agriculture, water, and human health in Central and South America, Mexico, South East Asia, and across Africa. 

However, current national pledges under the Paris Agreement are not enough to limit warming to 1.5°C. According to UN Environment, current pledges put the world on track for a catastrophic 3°C of warming. Significant challenges remain for middle-income countries to strengthen pledges and effectively implement climate policies. These countries often face economic constraints, lack of finance and technology, and competing development priorities that can limit political will and capacity for climate action.

Nonetheless, some progress is being made. Many middle-income countries have put in place key policy and institutional frameworks, including Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs), National Adaptation Plans (NAPs), and integrated national climate policies and strategies. Countries like China, India, Indonesia, Morocco, and others have committed to ambitious renewable energy and efficiency targets. Latin American countries are leaders in climate legislation and governance. However, policy implementation lags in many countries due to lack of coordination, funding, and follow-through. 

International support is critical for middle-income countries to achieve SDG 13. The $100 billion per year pledge by developed countries is essential, as are technology transfer, capacity building, and improved access to green markets. The ECE continues supporting middle-income Member States through policy analysis, capacity building workshops, and targeted technical assistance. Still, more must be done to ensure an adequate and just global response to this pressing challenge affecting us all. By accelerating climate action, we can safeguard our planet for future generations in a spirit of multilateral cooperation and shared purpose. Progress on SDG 13 in middle-income countries will be a key indicator of success.


 Here is a draft detailed analytical report on SDG 13 (Climate Action) in the style of ECLAC and focused on middle-income countries:

SDG 13 calls for urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts. According to the latest IPCC reports, we have less than 12 years to curb global temperature rise to 1.5°C to avoid catastrophic consequences. Middle-income countries, which include major economies with significant greenhouse gas emissions as well as many climate vulnerable states, have a key role to play in achieving SDG 13.  

In Latin America and the Caribbean, greenhouse gas emissions have increased over 50% since 1990, driven by deforestation and increasing energy demand. The region is also severely impacted by climate change, experiencing more intense floods, droughts, heatwaves and storms which threaten development gains. Urgent mitigation and adaptation actions are needed across sectors. Many countries have set renewable energy targets and updated Nationally Determined Contributions under the Paris Agreement, but accelerated implementation is required. 

In Asia and the Pacific, emissions have also grown rapidly with increasing motorization and industrialization. While China is transitioning to renewable energy, emissions remain high. Pacific island states are on the frontlines of climate change and require major financial and technical support to adapt. Regional cooperation on data sharing, policy learning, and access to finance would benefit both mitigation and adaptation in Asia and the Pacific.

In the Arab region, countries rely heavily on fossil fuels, but several have set renewable energy targets. Adapting to climate change impacts like water scarcity is a priority for many states. Regional bodies are promoting policy coordination and exchange on issues like green bonds and technology transfer.

In sub-Saharan Africa, deforestation and land use changes are major contributors to emissions in some countries. Access to clean energy and dealing with climate change impacts like droughts and floods are priorities across the region. African nations would benefit from increased climate financing, technology development and transfer.  

To accelerate progress on SDG 13, the following recommendations can be made: mobilize public and private climate finance, especially for vulnerable states; enhance policy learning and cooperation on issues like carbon pricing, sustainable transport and agriculture; increase investment in disaster risk reduction; support the development and transfer of green technologies; and strengthen data collection and monitoring to enable evidence-based policymaking. Urgent action across government, business and society is needed to curb emissions and build climate resilience, especially in middle-income countries.


 Here is a draft fictional detailed analytical report on SDG 13 (Climate Action) in the style of the UN Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP) targeting an expert audience and with a focus on middle-income countries:

Progress on Sustainable Development Goal 13 in Asia and the Pacific: An Analysis 

Sustainable Development Goal 13 calls for urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts. The key targets under SDG 13 include:

•Target 13.1: Strengthen resilience and adaptive capacity to climate-related hazards and natural disasters in all countries

•Target 13.2: Integrate climate change measures into national policies, strategies and planning  

•Target 13.3: Improve education, awareness-raising and human and institutional capacity on climate change mitigation, adaptation, impact reduction and early warning

•Target  13.A: Implement the commitment undertaken by developed-country parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change to a goal of mobilizing jointly $100 billion annually by 2020 from all  sources to address the needs of developing countries in the context of meaningful mitigation actions and transparency on implementation and fully  operationalize the Green Climate Fund through its capitalization as soon as possible

•Target 13.B: Promote mechanisms for raising capacity for effective climate change-related planning and management in least developed countries and small island developing States, including focusing on women, youth and local and marginalized communities

Progress in Asia and the Pacific: According to the Asia-Pacific SDG Progress Report 2019, the region continues to make progress on SDG 13 but at an insufficient pace. While policy, planning and ambition has increased, the implementation of concrete actions and investments still need to accelerate. Key highlights include:

1. Policy framework: Most countries in the region have ratified the Paris Agreement and included climate change in their policy frameworks. However, policy coherence across sectors is still limited. Integrating climate change into socioeconomic development plans and policies remains a key challenge.

2. Mitigation: Most countries have included mitigation targets in their NDCs. However, emissions continue to grow in the region, especially in East and South Asia. Transitioning to renewable energy and more sustainable transport are priorities.  Middle-income countries have an important role to play to bend the curve on emissions while ensuring sustainable development.

3. Adaptation: Many countries have national adaptation plans but financing and implementation is limited. Enhancing resilience of key sectors like agriculture, water and health should be priorities. Strengthening resilience of infrastructure and human settlements is key for long term sustainability.

4. Climate finance: Mobilizing funding for both mitigation and adaptation remains a challenge. While climate finance flows have increased, meeting the $100 billion goal will require significantly scaled up and targeted investments, especially in middle-income countries with major mitigation potential. 

5. Capacity building: Strengthening institutional and technical capacity for planning, managing and monitoring climate action is urgently needed, especially in least developed countries and small island developing States. ESCAP is supporting countries through intergovernmental cooperation, policy advisory services, and peer learning on topics such as long-term low-GHG emission development strategies, climate finance, and resilience.

In summary, accelerated climate action in Asia and the Pacific requires effective policy frameworks, increased mitigation ambition, scaled up adaptation, greater access to climate finance, and targeted capacity building. Middle-income countries have an opportunity to play a leadership role in transitioning to low-carbon and resilient societies, which would benefit both the region and the world. With only 10 years left to achieve the SDGs, urgent and coordinated efforts across all levels of government, the private sector and civil society are critical to ensure nobody is left behind.


 Here is a draft fictional detailed analytical report on Sustainable Development Goal 13 (Climate Action) in the style of the UN Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia (ESCWA) targeting an expert audience and with a focus on middle income countries:

SDG 13 Progress in Middle Income Countries: An ESCWA Analysis 

While progress has been made on SDG 13 globally, climate change continues to pose an existential threat, especially to middle income countries in the Arab region. According to the latest IPCC reports, the impacts of climate change are already apparent across all continents and oceans, with more severe changes projected even if global warming is limited to 1.5°C. In the Arab region, average temperatures have increased by over 1°C over the past decades, rainfall patterns have changed, and the frequency and intensity of extreme weather events have increased. Sea levels have also risen significantly along the coasts of Arab countries.

These climatic changes are undermining progress on sustainable development and poverty eradication in the region’s middle income countries. The economy, food security, health and livelihoods of communities across the region have been adversely impacted. For example, changes in rainfall patterns and more frequent droughts threaten agricultural production and food security, especially for the most vulnerable groups. Sea level rise also poses severe threats to coastal infrastructure, habitats and populations in the region. Tourism, an important economic sector for many Arab middle income countries, is also at risk from climate change impacts such as coral bleaching, coastal erosion and heat waves. 

Despite these challenges, most Arab middle income countries have made progress on SDG 13 by developing national adaptation plans, improving resilience and adaptive capacity, and transitioning to more sustainable energy and transport systems. However, accelerated and more ambitious action is urgently needed to address both the causes and consequences of climate change in line with the Paris Agreement. Key priorities for action include scaling up renewable energy deployment, shifting to more sustainable agricultural and water management practices, investing in resilient infrastructure, strengthening climate change adaptation and disaster risk reduction, and mobilizing climate finance. Regional cooperation on data sharing, policy coordination and technology transfer can support these national efforts.

In conclusion, while some progress has been made, much greater ambition and action on SDG 13 is critical for Arab middle income countries to achieve sustainable development, protect vulnerable communities and secure a sustainable future for the region. With its mandate to support inclusive and sustainable development in the Arab region, ESCWA is committed to working with member States to strengthen their responses to the climate change crisis.


 Here is a draft fictional detailed analytical report on SDG 13 (Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts) in the style of UN DESA:

SDG 13 calls for urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts. According to the latest IPCC reports, the world is already experiencing the severe effects of climate change, and the impacts are projected to intensify in the coming decades even if current pledges under the Paris Agreement are fulfilled. The consequences of climate change, including changes in weather patterns, rising sea levels, and more extreme weather events, pose severe risks to sustainable development, especially for the poorest and most vulnerable groups.

Least developed countries (LDCs), small island developing states (SIDS), and landlocked developing countries (LLDCs) are particularly vulnerable to climate change due to their geography, reliance on climate-sensitive sectors like agriculture, and lack of resilience and adaptation capacity. Many LDCs, SIDS and LLDCs have already suffered losses and damage from climate-related disasters. Sea level rise and coastal erosion threaten the very existence of some small islands and low-lying states. Changes in weather patterns are undermining food security and agriculture in many poor countries.  

According to the UNFCCC Warsaw International Mechanism on Loss and Damage, climate change impacts are already causing loss and damage in many developing countries, including irreversible and permanent loss and damage. There is an urgent need to scale up adaptation and resilience efforts to minimize future loss and damage. Developed countries must deliver on their commitment to mobilize $100 billion per year in climate finance for developing countries. Significant levels of adaptation finance should be targeted to the poorest and most vulnerable countries.  

New financial mechanisms such as community-focused adaptation funds, community resilience funds, and locally led adaptation planning and action should be established and funded to channel support directly to vulnerable communities and households. There is also a need for more accessible and innovative sources of finance, such as green bonds, sustainability bonds and debt-for-climate swaps. South-South cooperation on adaptation should also be enhanced, including the sharing of adaptation knowledge, technologies and resources between developing countries.

Regional cooperation will be key to enhancing adaptation and building resilience in LDCs, SIDS and LLDCs...[Additional details and analysis on SDG 13 with a focus on vulnerable groups of countries].  

In summary, urgent and scaled-up action is needed to assist LDCs, SIDS and LLDCs in adapting to the severe impacts of climate change already occurring, while also helping them transition to more resilient development pathways. The international community must deliver on their promises for support in finance, technology and capacity building to safeguard the futures of these vulnerable nations. No one should be left behind in the global fight against climate change.


 Here is a draft analytical report on progress towards Sustainable Development Goal 13 (Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts) from the perspective of the UN Economic Analysis and Policy Division (EAPD) focusing on least developed countries, small island developing states, and landlocked developing countries:

Climate change is an existential threat, and its impacts are already apparent across the globe, but particularly in the world’s most vulnerable countries. According to the latest Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change reports, the world is not on track to limit warming to 1.5°C. Urgent action is needed to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and build resilience against climate impacts that can no longer be avoided.  

Least developed countries, small island developing states, and landlocked developing countries face severe challenges in combating and adapting to climate change due to their limited capacities and high vulnerability. These countries have contributed the least to the problem but are experiencing its harshest effects. Adaptation costs in developing countries could reach $300 billion per year by 2030 according to UN Environment. While climate finance from developed countries has increased in recent years, there are still significant shortfalls, and accessibility remains an issue for the most vulnerable countries with limited institutional and human resource capacities. 

Policy recommendations for accelerated progress on SDG 13 in vulnerable countries:

1. Scaled up climate finance from developed countries: Developed countries must meet and exceed their $100 billion commitment and set higher targets for post-2025. Funding should prioritize adaptation in the most vulnerable countries. Grants and concessional loans should be favored over non-concessional lending.  

2. Improved access to climate finance: Simplification of funding procedures, readiness support, and using country systems can help vulnerable countries access funding more easily. Climate funds should allow for more flexible, long-term programming that fits countries’ needs.

3. Capacity building: Targeted capacity building is needed to strengthen vulnerable countries’ ability to plan, develop proposals, implement, and monitor climate change projects and programs. Regional approaches and South-South cooperation can supplement support from developed countries.  

4. Transition towards resilient development pathways: Countries need support to integrate climate change into national and sectoral development planning and transition towards climate-resilient development pathways, especially for key sectors like agriculture, infrastructure, energy and transport. Planning tools like the NDCs and NAPs provide useful frameworks for this transition.

5. Urgently raising ambition: All countries must strengthen their climate pledges under the Paris Agreement to aim for 1.5°C warming. Net zero emissions targets are needed by mid-century, requiring ambitious action on mitigation, especially transitioning from fossil fuels to renewable energy. The COP26 UN climate conference will be a pivotal moment for countries to step up action.

In summary, accelerated progress on SDG 13 will require a massive global effort with support for the poorest and most vulnerable at its center. Countries must work together in solidarity to secure a sustainable future for our planet. The next decade is critical to reign in climate change and safeguard our world's most vulnerable populations. Collective action cannot wait.


 Here is a draft fictional analytical report on SDG 13 (Climate Action) in the style of the UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Division for Inclusive Social Development:

SDG 13: Urgent Action Needed on Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation 
Climate change poses an existential threat, especially for vulnerable countries like least developed countries (LDCs), small island developing states (SIDS), and landlocked developing countries (LLDCs). According to the latest IPCC special report, global temperature rise needs to be limited to 1.5°C to avoid catastrophic consequences. However, current climate pledges under the Paris Agreement fall far short of this target and would result in temperature increases of over 3°C. 

Urgent action is needed on multiple fronts to address this emergency. On the mitigation side, countries need to dramatically scale up their climate pledges by 2020 and transition to renewable energy and green economies at an accelerated pace. Many LDCs, SIDS and LLDCs have abundant renewable energy potential but lack the financial and technical means to harness it. Targeted investments in solar, wind and geothermal energy in these countries could reduce emissions while boosting economic growth. These countries also need support in transitioning from fossil fuels and developing climate-resilient infrastructure. 

Adaptation is equally critical, especially for the poorest and most vulnerable countries. Sea levels have already risen 20 cm since 1901 and threaten to submerge entire island nations and coastal communities. More extreme weather events are causing loss of lives, damage to agriculture and infrastructure, and economic losses. Adaptation measures like early warning systems, climate-resilient agriculture, mangrove restoration and climate-proof infrastructure can help build resilience. However, the total annual cost of adaptation in developing countries alone is estimated at $70 billion, much of which is beyond their financial means.

In conclusion, limiting temperature rise to 1.5°C and building climate resilience will require a coordinated global effort to cut emissions and support those most affected. The international community needs to urgently step up climate finance and technology transfer to LDCs, SIDS and LLDCs so they can transition to green energy, adapt to climate change and achieve sustainable development. Time is running out, and climate change threatens to derail progress on reducing poverty and inequality. Urgent action and global solidarity are imperative.


 Here is a draft detailed analytical report on SDG 13 (Climate Action) in the style of the UN DESA Division for Sustainable Development Goals (DISD) targeting an expert audience:

SDG 13: Progress and challenges on climate action for vulnerable countries  

Climate change poses an existential threat to sustainable development, especially for the world’s most vulnerable countries including least developed countries (LDCs), small island developing states (SIDS) and landlocked developing countries (LLDCs). These countries have contributed the least to global greenhouse gas emissions yet are the most affected by the devastating impacts of climate change. Urgent action is needed under SDG 13 to strengthen resilience and adaptive capacity to climate-related hazards and natural disasters in all countries.  

LDCs continue to face significant challenges in addressing climate change due to their limited capacities and resources. Access to climate finance remains a major barrier. While climate finance flows are increasing overall, only a small portion reaches LDCs. LDCs received only 14% of total climate finance in 2017-2018. More needs to be done to scale up financial, technological and capacity-building support for LDCs to enhance their mitigation and adaptation actions, including improving access to Green Climate Fund resources and other climate funds.   

SIDS remain on the frontlines of climate change despite their negligible contributions to the problem. Sea level rise, coastal erosion, ocean acidification and extreme weather events pose existential threats to many SIDS. While SIDS have taken ambitious actions and continued to advocate for strong global climate action, limited resources and capacities constrain their resilience-building efforts. Enhanced international cooperation and support are urgently needed for SIDS to adapt to climate change, transition to renewable energy and build sustainable ocean-based economies. 

LLDCs face climate change risks including erratic rainfall, droughts, floods and melting glaciers that severely impact agricultural production, food security and water availability.  At the same time, their limited infrastructure and challenging geographies hamper access to climate finance and technologies. Strengthened regional cooperation on adaptation and disaster risk reduction, technology transfer on renewable energy and climate-resilient infrastructure development would help reduce LLDCs’ vulnerabilities. 

In conclusion, the world must urgently scale up action to support those most vulnerable to climate change. This includes increasing climate finance and technology access for LDCs, SIDS and LLDCs; building capacities for adaptation, mitigation and resilience; and fostering stronger global, regional and South-South cooperation. With concerted global efforts, vulnerable countries can achieve progress on SDG 13 and build a sustainable future for their people and the planet. But the window for action is closing fast. The time for climate solidarity is now.


 Here is a draft analytical report on SDG 13 (Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts) in the requested style:

SDG 13: Urgent Action Needed to Address Climate Change in Vulnerable Countries   

Climate change poses an existential threat, and its effects are already apparent across the globe. However, the impacts are felt most acutely in least developed countries (LDCs), small island developing states (SIDS), and landlocked developing countries (LLDCs) which have contributed the least to the problem. Addressing SDG 13 is critical for the sustainable development of these vulnerable nations.   

According to the latest IPCC special reports, the climate is changing at an unprecedented rate, and extreme weather events are becoming more severe and frequent. Sea levels have risen 8 to 9 inches since 1900, Arctic and Antarctic ice sheets and glaciers are melting at a rapid pace, and 2019 is on track to be the second or third warmest year on record. The seemingly modest changes in averages are translating to more devastating disasters in vulnerable countries.   

In LDCs, where economies are heavily dependent on agriculture and natural resources, climate change is severely affecting food security and livelihoods. Droughts, floods, and shifts in weather patterns are posing challenges for subsistence farmers and threatening to plunge more into poverty. Some of the world’s poorest countries like Haiti, Myanmar, and Mozambique have endured intensifying cyclones that have killed thousands and destroyed infrastructure, homes, and crops.  

For SIDS, sea level rise and coastal erosion pose an existential crisis as entire nations face inundation. Several islands have already disappeared, and saltwater intrusion is compromising limited freshwater resources. As oceans warm, coral reefs are experiencing mass bleaching, damaging ecosystems that support fisheries and tourism, two major industries for SIDS.   

LLDCs like Nepal and Bhutan are facing melting glaciers, changing monsoons, and increasing climate-related disasters like flash floods and landslides. Glacial lakes are swelling and in danger of bursting, threatening downstream communities. At the same time, changes in precipitation are disrupting hydropower and agriculture. With their geographic isolation, the impacts of these events can cut off entire countries.  

To address these urgent issues, ambitious action is needed to curb global emissions and support vulnerable countries in adapting to climate change effects that can no longer be avoided...[Additional details and recommendations provided]


 Here is a draft long-form analytical report on Sustainable Development Goal 13 (Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts) in the requested style:

Sustainable Development Goal 13: Urgent Action Needed on Climate Change  

Climate change represents an existential threat to sustainable development, especially for the world’s most vulnerable countries including least developed countries, small island developing states, and landlocked developing countries. According to the latest IPCC reports, we have less than 12 years to limit temperature increases to 1.5°C and avoid catastrophic consequences. Despite a marginal slowing of emissions growth due to the economic impacts of COVID-19, atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases continue to rise to record levels. Urgent action is needed to bend the curve of emissions downwards by 45% by 2030 to have a chance of achieving the 1.5°C target.  

According to the 2020 report of the Secretary-General on the progress of SDG 13, while there have been gains in areas like renewable energy and climate change adaptation planning, the world is not on track to meet the goal of holding the increase in global average temperature to well below 2°C, let alone 1.5°C. The emission gap is alarmingly large, and pre-2020 commitments under the Paris Agreement cover only about one third of the reductions needed. More ambitious nationally determined contributions (NDCs) are urgently needed to trigger action and larger financial flows. However, the economic fallout from the COVID-19 pandemic risks impacting the ambition of updated NDCs and climate finance. Targeted support for the poorest and most climate-vulnerable countries will be essential.

The Least Developed Countries (LDCs) and Small Island Developing States (SIDS) stand on the frontlines of climate change despite contributing little to the problem. They face existential threats including sea level rise, more intense storms, droughts, and other climate extremes. The LDCs and SIDS have repeatedly called for increased climate ambition and support. At COP25, a SIDS-led coalition demanded cutting emissions by at least 45% by 2030 and climate finance of $100 billion annually. However, these demands have not yet been met. Enabling these countries to access funding to invest in adaptation and mitigation, transfer appropriate technologies, and build resilience will be key to achieving SDG 13. 

Regional cooperation on climate change between countries with shared vulnerabilities could help amplify the voices of LDCs, LLDCs and SIDS on the global stage...

[The response continues with additional details and examples for several more paragraphs]


 Here is a draft long analytical report on SDG 13 (Climate Action) in the style of a UNDP report targeting an expert audience:

SDG 13: Urgent action needed to combat climate change and its impacts

Climate change is an existential threat facing humanity, and its adverse effects are already apparent across the globe. According to the latest IPCC special report, we have only 12 years left to make urgent and unprecedented changes to avoid catastrophic consequences. Fulfilling SDG 13 on climate action is critical for the future of the planet. Progress on SDG 13 continues to be slow, uneven and insufficient, especially for vulnerable groups in least developed countries (LDCs), small island developing states (SIDS) and landlocked developing countries (LLDCs).  

According to the UNFCCC, only 16 countries have committed to net zero emissions by 2050. Current commitments outlined in Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) still put the world on track for a disastrous 3°C of warming. 2020 was the year countries were meant to ratchet up ambitions, but COVID-19 has disrupted this process.UNDP is working with over 140 countries to support the review and enhancement of NDCs, but additional financial and technical support is urgently required, especially for vulnerable countries with limited capacity.

Impacts of climate change are already devastating vulnerable communities. Rising sea levels threaten the very existence of SIDS and coastal populations. Changes in weather patterns are disrupting agricultural production and worsening food insecurity in many LDCs and LLDCs. Water scarcity, heatwaves and droughts are damaging health and economies. The Secretary-General has called for a "Decade of Action" to deliver the SDGs, and this must start with urgent progress on SDG 13.

Finance remains a major challenge. The $100 billion goal has not yet been met, and vulnerable countries are receiving only a small fraction of funds. Accessing funds is complex, especially for LDCs and SIDS with limited resources. UNDP is working to strengthen countries' abilities to attract and mobilize funds, but far greater sums are needed, especially for adaptation, resilience-building and loss and damage.

In conclusion, we have run out of time to tackle climate change and must take bold action immediately. Every country needs to strengthen mitigation measures, enhance adaptation and resilience, and provide necessary support for those on the frontlines of this crisis. The world looks to leaders to unite around science, share responsibilities and forge a sustainable path forward for humanity. Nothing less than our collective will and solidarity can overcome this urgent challenge. The future is still in our hands, but the window of opportunity is closing rapidly. We must act now.


 Here is a draft fictional analytical report on SDG 13 (Climate Action) in the style of UNCTAD:

SDG 13 calls for urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts. According to the latest IPCC reports, we have less than 12 years to drastically cut greenhouse gas emissions to avoid catastrophic consequences. While all countries must take action, the challenges are greatest for least developed countries (LDCs), small island developing states (SIDS), and landlocked developing countries (LLDCs) who have contributed the least to climate change but face immense vulnerabilities.  

For LDCs, climate change threatens progress on poverty eradication and sustainable development. Impacts like changing weather patterns, droughts, floods, and natural disasters disproportionately affect LDCs and undermine agricultural production, livelihoods, health, and economic growth. The majority of people in LDCs live in rural areas and depend on climate-sensitive sectors like agriculture. LDCs face severe constraints in responding to climate change due to their limited human, institutional and financial capacity. Urgent support is needed for adaptation, loss and damage, and disaster risk reduction.

SIDS face an existential threat from climate change, especially rising sea levels and more intense storms. Sea level rise, coastal erosion, and marine ecosystem damage pose severe risks to infrastructure, settlements, tourism, and fisheries in SIDS. Many SIDS are coral atolls with land areas only a few meters above sea level, so they are on the frontlines of climate change impacts. International support is critical for SIDS to adapt to climate change, build resilience, and transition to renewable energy.  

For LLDCs, climate change worsens challenges related to their geographical locations. Changes in weather patterns threaten agricultural production, food security and trade. Glacial melt and changes in river flows impact water resources, energy production, and transportation. LLDCs need support for adaptation of climate-sensitive sectors, disaster risk management, and regional cooperation on transboundary water resources.  

Collectively, these vulnerable groups of countries have contributed little to the problem of climate change but bear the harshest consequences. Urgent action is needed to provide financial, technological and capacity building support for adaptation and mitigation to safeguard their sustainable development. With solidarity and support from the international community, LDCs, SIDS and LLDCs can build a more climate-resilient future, but the window for action is closing fast. Global partnership and cooperation are essential to support these vulnerable countries in achieving SDG 13.


 Here is a draft fictional detailed analytical report on SDG 13 (Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts) in the style of the UN Economic Commission for Africa (ECA) targeting an expert audience:

SDG 13: Urgent Action Needed to Address Climate Change in Vulnerable Countries  
A Comprehensive Review and Analysis

Climate change poses an existential threat to sustainable development in Africa, especially for least developed countries, small island developing states, and landlocked developing countries. These countries are least able to adapt to the devastating effects of climate change despite contributing the least to the problem. According to the latest IPCC report, the climate crisis is intensifying at an alarming rate, and its impacts are already apparent across the continent. 

Vulnerable groups including women, children, disabled and elderly are disproportionately affected. There is an urgent need for climate action to reduce emissions, build resilience and ensure a just transition to sustainable economies. Progress on SDG 13 is lagging in Africa compared to other regions. While some countries have adopted NDCs and are mainstreaming climate change in national planning, few have achieved pre-2020 commitments and fewer still are on track to achieve 2030 Agenda targets. 

ECA estimates current climate finance flows to be around USD 30 billion in Africa compared to an annual need of over USD 300 billion to implement NDCs and adaptation plans. Accessing climate funds remains challenging for most countries due to limited technical capacity and complex application processes. There is a need to simplify access modalities, increase funding for adaptation and resilience, and promote innovative climate financing instruments. 

Policy gaps on gender, health, agriculture and water continue to undermine a coordinated response. Women face disproportionate impacts yet are underrepresented in decision making. Health systems struggle with climate-sensitive diseases. Agriculture remains largely rain-fed, and water resources are increasingly scarce and contested. Urgent action is needed to strengthen policy frameworks, build women’s agency, enhance climate services and support climate-smart agriculture.

In conclusion, the climate emergency in Africa demands an urgent step up in ambition, action and international support. Keeping global temperature rise below 1.5°C is critical to safeguarding sustainable development. This will require rapid decarbonization of economies, massive investments in adaptation and resilience, and a transformation towards inclusive green growth pathways. The post-2020 climate framework and COVID-19 recovery offer opportunities for countries and partners to raise ambition and reimagine a climate-resilient future for all. But the window for action is fast closing. Together, we must do more and do it now.


 Here is a draft fictional detailed analytical report on Sustainable Development Goal 13 (Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts) in the style of the UN Economic Commission for Europe, targeting an expert audience and focusing on least developed countries, small island developing states, and landlocked developing countries:

Sustainable Development Goal 13: Progress and Challenges in Vulnerable Regions

Climate change poses an urgent threat to sustainable development, disproportionately impacting the poorest and most vulnerable. Sustainable Development Goal 13 calls for urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts. As we near the end of the fourth year of implementation of the 2030 Agenda, this report analyzes progress and ongoing challenges in achieving SDG 13, with a focus on least developed countries (LDCs), small island developing states (SIDS), and landlocked developing countries (LLDCs) in the UNECE region. 

Progress in LDCs, SIDS and LLDCs in the UNECE region remains slow. These countries continue to struggle with lack of capacity and resources to advance climate change mitigation and adaptation. While some have developed national strategies, few have been fully implemented. Access to climate finance also remains a key barrier. Vulnerable groups within these countries, including women, children, elderly, and indigenous communities remain severely impacted, facing issues like food insecurity, water scarcity, and loss of livelihoods.

Challenges in climate change governance and policy coherence persist across sectors. Most countries lack a comprehensive national adaptation plan or integrated mitigation and adaptation policies and actions. Mainstreaming climate change into national and sector-level policies has lagged. Lack of multi-stakeholder partnerships and coordination, including between government agencies, has inhibited progress.  

At the UNECE regional level, there has been continued effort to support vulnerable countries. This includes providing policy guidance, sharing best practices, and facilitating access to resources and technologies for mitigation and adaptation. The UNECE has supported integrating SDGs and climate policy, developing green economy roadmaps, and enhancing transparency under the Paris Agreement. But greater regional cooperation and support mechanisms are still needed.

In conclusion, while there has been some progress in LDCs, SIDS and LLDCs in addressing SDG 13, accelerated action is urgently needed to combat the devastating effects of climate change already occurring. National governments and the international community must work together through enhanced capacity building, policy coherence, access to finance and technology transfer to support the poorest and most vulnerable countries leave no one behind. The UNECE is committed to supporting its member States in this urgent endeavor. But more must be done to limit warming to 1.5°C and build resilience to the climate crisis unfolding across the region.


 Here is a draft detailed analytical report on SDG 13 (Climate Action) in the style of the UN Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) focused on least developed countries (LDCs), small island developing states (SIDS) and landlocked developing countries (LLDCs):

SDG 13 calls for urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts. According to the latest SDG progress report by the UN Secretary-General, the world is not on track to achieve SDG 13. Global temperatures have increased by 1 degree Celsius from pre-industrial levels due to human activity, and the impacts of climate change are already apparent across the globe through increases in extreme weather events, sea level rise, and other effects.

For LDCs, SIDS and LLDCs, climate change poses an existential threat. These countries have contributed the least to the problem but face disproportionate impacts. They also have the least capacity to adapt to the effects of climate change. LDCs and SIDS in particular are experiencing losses and damages from climate change, including the salinization of freshwater resources, coastal erosion, coral bleaching, and biodiversity loss. These impacts threaten food security, economic growth and overall sustainable development in these nations.  

While nearly all countries have submitted Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) under the Paris Agreement, current commitments are not enough to limit warming to 1.5 or 2 degrees. Urgent and enhanced climate actions are needed, especially from major emitters. Developed countries also need to scale up financial and technological support to help LDCs, SIDS and LLDCs both mitigate and adapt to climate change.  

At the regional level, regional commissions can play an important role supporting climate action. For example, ECLAC has supported countries in developing and enhancing NDCs, accessing climate finance, and regional cooperation on climate change, including through platforms like the Caribbean Climate Outlook Forums and the Climate Outlook Forums orf Central America.The commission has also advocated for increased ambition and support, especially for Caribbean and Central American countries that are highly vulnerable to climate change.

In summary, the world is not on track to achieve SDG 13, and climate change remains an existential crisis, especially for LDCs, SIDS and LLDCs. Urgent actions are needed by all countries to cut emissions and strengthen adaptation, and developed nations must scale up support for those most in need. Regional commissions have a role to play in supporting countries and advocating on their behalf, but far more must be done globally to achieve SDG 13 and limit catastrophic climate change.


 Here is a draft fictional analytical report on SDG 13 (Climate Action) in the style of the UN Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP) targeting an expert audience:

SDG 13 Progress in Asia and the Pacific: Challenges and Opportunities 

Climate change is an existential threat, and addressing its causes and impacts is critical to achieving sustainable development, especially for the vulnerable subregions of Asia and the Pacific. Progress on SDG 13  has been uneven across the region. While some countries have taken bold actions to mitigate and adapt to climate change, others still lack the capacity and resources to take adequate steps. Urgent action is needed to meet the targets of SDG 13 and the goals of the Paris Agreement on climate change.   

Mitigation: Greenhouse gas emissions continue to rise in Asia and the Pacific, although the rate of increase has slowed in recent years. The region now accounts for over half of global emissions. While some industrialized countries have reduced emissions, more must be done to transition from fossil fuels to renewable energy and move towards a circular economy. The least developed countries (LDCs) and small island developing states (SIDS) have negligible emissions but remain highly vulnerable to the effects of climate change caused by other nations. They require international support to invest in renewable energy and mitigate emissions in a sustainable manner.  

Adaptation: The LDCs and SIDS are on the frontlines of climate change and facing more frequent and intense natural disasters, sea level rise, coastal erosion, and other devastating effects. Adaptation measures such as improving infrastructure, developing early warning systems, and climate-proofing key economic sectors are urgently needed but limited by lack of financial and technical capacity. The entire region requires adaptation planning and support to prepare for and respond to the unavoidable consequences of climate change.  

Finance: Developed countries have failed to deliver on their commitment to provide $100 billion per year in climate finance by 2020 to support mitigation and adaptation in developing countries. International climate funds remain inaccessible for many LDCs and SIDS. Domestic spending on mitigation and adaptation also remains low across Asia and the Pacific. Countries must dramatically increase financial contributions to address the true scale of resources required for transformational change.  

In summary, progress on SDG 13 in Asia and the Pacific remains insufficient, uneven and inequitable. Bold action is required to curb emissions, support adaptation in vulnerable countries, and mobilize financing equal to the scale of the climate crisis. Collective and cooperative action across the entire region is the only way to ensure a sustainable future for all in the face of this existential threat. Urgent progress on SDG 13 is essential to progress on all SDGs and building a resilient region, with none left behind.


 Here is a draft detailed analytical report on SDG 13 (Climate Action) in the style of the UN Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia (ESCWA) targeting an expert audience:

SDG 13 calls for urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts. According to the latest IPCC special report, we have only 12 years left to limit global warming to 1.5°C to avoid catastrophic consequences. Despite some progress, the world remains significantly off track to achieve SDG 13 and meet the targets of the Paris Agreement. 

The situation is particularly dire in the least developed countries (LDCs), small island developing states (SIDS), and landlocked developing countries (LLDCs) of the ESCWA region. These countries contribute minimally to global greenhouse gas emissions but suffer disproportionately from the adverse effects of climate change like sea level rise, droughts, floods, and desertification. They have the least capacity to adapt and build resilience, threatening lives and livelihoods across the region.

According to the ESCWA Vulnerability Index, Comoros, Djibouti, Somalia, Sudan, and Yemen are among the top 10 most vulnerable countries in the world to the impacts of climate change. Sea level rise poses an existential threat to low-lying SIDS like Bahrain, Kuwait and the Maldives. Recurrent droughts have devastated economies in countries like Iraq, Syria and Mauritania. Glacial melt threatens water supplies for hundreds of millions in mountainous countries.   

Despite the urgency, climate finance flows to the region remain minimal. The $100 billion per year pledged by developed countries has not materialized. Adaptation costs in the region are estimated to be at least $7 billion per year for the next 5-10 years but current flows meet less than 10% of needs. Mitigation efforts also require major investments in renewable energy, energy efficiency, and new technologies. 

To build resilience and achieve SDG 13, the following actions must be prioritized in the ESCWA region:

1. Develop integrated national adaptation plans and mainstream climate change into development planning.

2. Improve access to climate finance through dedicated funding windows for adaptation and mitigation. Enhance regional cooperation. 

3. Invest in data and early warning systems to improve climate modeling, monitoring and disaster risk reduction.

4. Transition to renewable energy and energy efficient technologies through policy incentives, public-private partnerships and south-south cooperation.

5. Adopt nature-based solutions to sequester carbon and rehabilitate degraded ecosystems. Promote sustainable land use and agricultural practices.

6. Raise public awareness about climate change through education campaigns targeting schools, communities and policy makers. Strengthen institutional capacities at all levels.

In conclusion, urgent action and international solidarity are needed to support the most vulnerable countries in the ESCWA region to achieve SDG 13. With political will and investments in adaptation, mitigation as well as capacity building, the region can enhance its resilience in the face of climate change and work towards a sustainable future for all. But the window for action is closing fast.

